HIV, AIDS, and Older People.

Grace was dating again. She and George,
a family friend she had known for years,
became quite close and their relationship
became sexual. Because she wasn’t worried
about getting pregnant, Grace didn’t think
about using condoms. And, because she had
known George for so long, she didn’t think to
ask him about his sexual history. So, Grace
was shocked when she tested positive for HIV.
Like most people, you probably have
heard a lot about HIV and AIDS. You
may have thought that these diseases
aren’t your problem and that only
younger people have to worry about
them. But, anyone at any age can be
infected with HIV.
What Is HIV? What Is AIDS?
HIV (human immunodeficiency
virus) is a virus that damages and
weakens the body’s immune system—
the system your body uses to fight off
infection and disease. Having HIV puts
a person in danger of experiencing
other life-threatening infections and
certain cancers.
When the body cannot fight off
infections and some other diseases
anymore, HIV can lead to a serious
illness called AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome). When someone
has AIDS, they are more likely to get
infections and more vulnerable to
unusual forms of cancers and other
serious diseases. But, with early and
uninterrupted treatment, it is possible
that a person with HIV will never
develop AIDS.
If you think you may have HIV, you
should get tested. Everyone age 13 to
64 should be tested at least once for
HIV. If you are over 64 and are at risk
for HIV, talk with your doctor. Your
doctor can help determine how often
you should be tested and help find
ways to reduce your risk.
There are drugs that, when taken
consistently, can help suppress the
amount of HIV in your blood to
undetectable levels, improving your
health overall and making it harder to
pass HIV on to your sexual partners. To
get the best results, it is important to start
treatment as soon as possible. If you are
unsure about your HIV status, get tested. 

Always protect yourself and your partners
when having sex or using needles.
How Do I Get Tested for HIV?
A small blood sample, mouth swab,
or urine sample is used to test people for
HIV. It can take as long as 3 to 6 months
after initial exposure for the signs of the
virus to show up in your blood, and years
before you show any symptoms.
You can be tested at a doctor’s
office, hospital, community health
center, or other health clinic. Some
places have mobile testing vans. AIDS
services organizations also may provide
testing. At-home testing kits are also
available.
Depending on where you go,
testing may be free. You may be able to
choose to take the test without giving
your name. Many providers or groups
that offer HIV testing also provide
counseling.
If you choose to take a test at home,
make sure to use a test that has been
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA). If the test has
not been approved by the FDA, it may
not give accurate results. Home tests
are sold at drugstores and online.
Follow up with your doctor to confirm
the results of at-home tests and, if
necessary, begin treatment.

Finding a Place to Get Tested for HIV

Your doctor or other healthcare provider
can test you for HIV or tell you where you
can get tested. Or, the following resources
can help you find a testing location:
■ HIV Testing and Care Locator,
https://locator.hiv.gov
■ Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1-800-232-4636
(toll-free) or https://gettested.cdc.gov
■ Your local health department,
www.naccho.org/programs/communityhealth/infectious-disease/hiv-sti
Drugstores also sell home testing kits (such
as the Home Access™ HIV-1 Test System or
the OraQuick® In-Home HIV Test).
How Is HIV Transmitted?
Anyone, at any age, can get HIV.
People usually acquire HIV from
unprotected sex with someone living
with HIV, through contact with HIVinfected blood, or by sharing needles
with a person living with HIV. You may
be at risk if:
■ You had sex without a latex or
polyurethane condom. The virus passes
from the person living with HIV to
his or her partner via blood, semen,
or vaginal fluid. During sex, HIV can
get into your body through body fluids
and any opening, such as a tear or
cut in the lining of the vagina, vulva,
penis, rectum, or—rarely—the mouth.
Latex condoms can help prevent HIV
transmission between sexual partners.
(Natural condoms, like condoms made
from lambskin, are not as effective as
latex and polyurethane condoms at
protecting against HIV/AIDS.)
■ You or your sexual partner(s) have
shared needles with a person living with
HIV. People who inject illegal drugs are
not the only people who might share
needles. For example, people with
diabetes who inject insulin or draw
blood to test glucose levels could also
share needles. Talk to your partner(s)
about their drug and sexual history,
and always use a new, sterile needle for
injections.
■ You had a blood transfusion or
operation in a developing country at
any time.
■ You had a blood transfusion in the
United States between 1978 and 1985.
■ You were diagnosed with or
treated for hepatitis or tuberculosis
(TB) at any time.
Talk to Your Partner(s) About
Their Drug and Sexual History
Learning more about HIV risks can help
you stay healthy. Even though it may be
hard to do, ask your partner about his
or her sexual history and whether he or
she has ever shared needles. You might
ask: Have you been tested for HIV? Have
you ever had unprotected sex? Have you
injected drugs or shared needles with
someone else?
What Are the Symptoms of HIV?
Many people do not notice symptoms
when they first acquire HIV. It can
take as little as a few weeks for minor,
flu-like symptoms to show up, or
more than 10 years for more serious
symptoms to appear, or any time in
between. Signs of early HIV infection
include flu-like symptoms such as
headache, muscle aches, swollen
glands, sore throat, fevers, chills, and
sweating, and can also include a rash
or mouth ulcers. Symptoms of laterstage HIV or AIDS include swollen
glands, lack of energy, loss of appetite,
weight loss, chronic or recurrent
diarrhea, repeated yeast infections,
short-term memory loss, and blotchy
lesions affecting the skin, mouth,
eyelids, nose, or genital area.

Is HIV/AIDS Different in
Older People?
A growing number of older people
are living with HIV/AIDS. One reason
is because improved treatments are
helping people with the disease live
longer. Nearly half of people living
with HIV in the United States are
age 50 and older. Many of them were
diagnosed with HIV in their younger
years. However, thousands of older
people get HIV every year.
Older people are less likely than
younger people to get tested, so they
may not know they have HIV. Signs
of HIV/AIDS can be mistaken for the
aches and pains of normal aging.
Older adults might be coping with
other diseases and the aches and pains
of normal aging that can mask the
signs of HIV/AIDS.
Some older people may feel
ashamed or afraid of being tested.
Plus, doctors do not always think to test
older people for HIV. By the time the
older person is diagnosed, the virus
may be in the late stages and more
likely to progress to AIDS.
Remember, if you are at risk, get
tested regularly for HIV.
For people who have HIV, it is
important to start treatment as soon
as possible after diagnosis. Treatment
can help reduce the level of HIV in
the blood to undetectable levels. When
treatment makes HIV undetectable, the
possibility of spreading the virus to a
sexual partner becomes very low. This is
known as treatment as prevention (TasP).
Facts About HIV/AIDS
You may have read or heard things that
are not true about how you get HIV. Here
are the facts:
■ You cannot get HIV through casual
contact, such as shaking hands or
hugging a person with HIV/AIDS.
■ You cannot get HIV from using a
public telephone, drinking fountain,
restroom, swimming pool, whirlpool,
or hot tub.
■ You cannot get HIV from sharing
a drink.
■ You cannot get HIV from being
coughed or sneezed on by a person
with HIV/AIDS.
■ You cannot get HIV from giving blood.
■ You cannot get HIV from a
mosquito bite.

Even when the disease is well
controlled, people with HIV may
develop aging-related conditions at a
younger age. HIV and its treatment
can also affect other parts of the body,
such as the brain and the heart. For
example, people living with HIV are
significantly more likely to develop
cardiovascular disease than people
without HIV. Older people living with
HIV also have an increased risk of
dementia. Talk with your doctor if you
are concerned about how living with
HIV could affect you as you grow older.
Is There a Cure for HIV?
There is no cure for HIV. But if you
acquire the virus, there are drugs that
help suppress the level of HIV in the
body and prevent its spread to other
people. Doctors use a combination of
drugs called HAART (highly active
antiretroviral therapy) to treat HIV/AIDS.
Although it is not a cure, HAART has
greatly reduced the number of deaths
from HIV-related complications in the
United States. HIV has become like a
chronic disease, and people living with
HIV receiving successful treatment can
live a long and healthy life.
Preventing HIV
Remember, there are things you can
do to keep from getting or transmitting
HIV. Take the following steps to lower
your risk:
■ If you are having sex, consider
limiting your number of sexual partners.
If you or your partner is having sex with
other people, or if you don’t know his
or her sexual or drug history, always use
protection. The more partners you have,
the more likely you are to be exposed to a
sexually transmitted infection.
■ Before having sex with someone, talk
with them about HIV. Ask about their
sexual and drug history. Get tested for
sexually transmitted infections every year.
■ Learn about the risks of different
sexual activities and reduce your risk. (See
the CDC’s HIV Risk Reduction Tool at
wwwn.cdc.gov/hivrisk for information about
the risk associated with specific sexual
behaviors.)
■ Use male or female condoms (latex or
polyurethane) during sexual intercourse.
■ Do not share needles or any other
equipment used to inject drugs. Always
use new, sterile needles for injections.
■ Get tested if you or your partner
has had an operation or blood
transfusion in a developing country
at any time.

■ Get tested if you or your partner
had a blood transfusion between 1978
and 1985 in the United States.
If you are at very high risk for HIV
infection through sex or injection
drug use, you may prevent it by taking
an anti-HIV medication daily, called
pre-exposure prophylaxis, or PrEP.
PrEP is effective at reducing the risk
of acquiring HIV, but it must be taken
every day. Talk with your doctor to
find out whether PreP is right for you.
