ItchingItching can be very uncomfortable. It is one of the most common reasons people see doctors who specialize in skin disorders (dermatologists).Itching makes people want to scratch. Scratching temporarily relieves itching but can damage the skin, sometimes resulting in more itching (the itch-scratch cycle) or infection (called a secondary infection). Over time, the skin can become thick and scaly (called lichenification).CausesItching can result from■ Skin disorders (most common cause).■ Disorders of other organs (systemic disorders).■ Drugs and chemicals.Skin disorders.The most common causes of itching are skin disorders:■ Dry skin (see xeroderma and ichthyosis).■ Atopic dermatitis (sometimes called eczema).■ Contact dermatitis (an allergic rash resulting from direct contact with a particular substance).■ Fungal skin infections.Insect bites and parasitic skin infections, such as scabies, can cause intense itching.Hives are a common type of itching rash that can be caused by a variety of skin or systemic conditions or drugs and chemicals.Systemic disorders.Systemic causes are less common than skin disorders but are more likely if there is no visible skin problem.Some of the more common systemic causes are.■ Allergic reactions—for example, to foods, drugs, bites, or stings—that affect the body all over (called systemic allergic reactions).■ Disorders of the gallbladder or liver, such as gallstones, particularly when they cause jaundice.■ Chronic kidney disease.Less common systemic causes include hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid gland), hypothyroidism (an underactive thyroid gland), diabetes, iron deficiency, dermatitis herpetiformis, and polycythemia vera (a cancerous overproduction of red blood cells).Some disorders that affect the nervous system, such as multiple sclerosis, may cause itching. Some people who have mental disorders may have itching for which no physical cause can be found. This type of itching is called psychogenic itching.DrugsDrugs and chemicals can cause itching when taken internally or when applied to the skin. Usually the itching is caused by an allergic reaction. A few drugs, such as morphine and some radiopaque contrast agents used when taking certain x-rays, can also cause itching without causing an allergic reaction.EvaluationNot every episode of itching requires immediate evaluation by a doctor. The following information can help people decide whether a doctor's evaluation is needed and help them know what to expect during the evaluation. Most conditions causing itching are not serious.Warning signsThe following may indicate that the cause could be serious:■ Weight loss, fatigue, or night sweats—may indicate a serious infection or a tumor.■ Weakness, numbness, or tingling—may indicate a nervous system disorder.■ Abdominal pain or a yellowish discoloration of the skin and eyes (jaundice)—may indicate a gallbladder or liver disorder.■ Excessive thirst, abnormally frequent urination, and weight loss—may indicate diabetesWhen to see a doctor.People who have weight loss, fatigue, or night sweats should see a doctor as soon as convenient, probably within a week or so. People with any of the other warning signs or with severe itching should probably see a doctor immediately or as soon as possible.What the doctor doesDoctors ask many questions and look at the skin. Often, a person needs to undress so that the entire skin surface can be checked. If no clear cause is found after checking the skin, doctors may do a complete physical examination to check for systemic causes. Testing may be necessary to diagnose certain systemic causes and sometimes skin disorders.If itching is widespread and begins shortly after use of a drug, that drug is a likely cause. If itching (usually with a rash) is confined to an area in contact with a substance, particularly if the substance is known to cause contact dermatitis, that substance is a likely cause. However, allergic causes of widespread itching can be difficult to identify because affected people have usually eaten several different foods and have been exposed to many substances that could cause an allergic reaction before itching develops. Similarly, identifying a drug that is causing the reaction in a person taking several drugs may be difficult. Sometimes the person has been taking the drug causing the reaction for months or even years before a reaction occurs.Table.Testing.Most causes of itching can be diagnosed without testing. If the diagnosis of a skin abnormality is not clear from its appearance and the person's history, removal (biopsy) of a skin sample may be necessary so that it can be analyzed.If the cause of itching seems to be an allergic reaction but the substance causing the allergic reaction is not evident, skin testing may be necessary. In skin testing, substances that can cause allergic reactions on contact are applied to the skin, either in a patch (called patch testing) or with a small needle (called skin prick testing).If the cause seems not to be an allergic reaction or skin disorder, testing is done based on the person's other symptoms. For example, tests may be done for gallbladder or liver disorders, chronic kidney disease, thyroid disorders, diabetes, or cancer.Treatment■ Topical treatments.■ Systemic treatments.Disorders that cause itching are treated. Sometimes other measures can also help relieve itching.Skin care.Skin care measures can help relieve itching regardless of cause. Baths or showers should be short, no more frequent than necessary, and taken with cool or lukewarm (not hot) water. Using moisturizing soap and skin moisturizers can also help, as can humidifying dry air (for example, in winter) and not wearing tight or wool clothing.Topical treatmentsTopical treatments involve substances that are applied to the skin. Topical treatments are used only if a specific area is affected. Options include lotions or creams that contain menthol and/or camphor, pramoxine, capsaicin, or corticosteroids. To be effective, capsaicin cream should be used for at least 2 weeks. It tends to burn, but the burning decreases over time. Menthol and camphor creams have strong odors but can be soothing, as can tacrolimus or pimecrolimus creams.Corticosteroid creams can help relieve itching and often clear up the rash and other skin abnormalities in disorders such as atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, psoriasis, and lichen simplex chronicus.Corticosteroids should usually not be used when■ The skin is infected.■ An infestation is present.■ No rash or skin abnormalities are present.■ The cause is systemic.Creams and lotions that contain the antihistamine diphenhydramine or the anesthetic benzocaine usually should not be used because they can sensitize the skin and cause more itching.Exposure to ultraviolet light at a doctor's office or in the home (phototherapy) may help relieve itching when other treatments are unsuccessful.Systemic treatmentsSystemic treatments are drugs that are taken internally, usually by mouth. They are used if itching is widespread or if topical treatments are ineffective.Antihistamines, particularly hydroxyzine, are used most often. Some antihistamines, such as cyproheptadine, diphenhydramine, and hydroxyzine, cause drowsiness. They help relieve itching and, when used before bedtime, aid in sleep. However, these drugs are usually not given during the day to older people, who are at higher risk of falling because of drowsiness. Cetirizine and loratadine cause less drowsiness but rarely can have this effect in older people. Fexofenadine causes less drowsiness but sometimes causes a headache. Doxepin makes people very drowsy and is effective, so it can be taken at bedtime if itching is severe.Cholestyramine is used to treat itching caused by gallbladder or liver disorders, chronic kidney disease, or polycythemia vera. However, cholestyramine has an unpleasant taste, causes constipation, and can decrease absorption of other drugs.Naltrexone can be used to treat itching caused by gallbladder or liver disorders but may increase pain if pain is present.Gabapentin can help relieve itching caused by chronic kidney disease but can cause drowsiness.Key Points■ Itching usually results from dry skin, a skin disorder, or an allergic reaction.■ If the person has no rash or skin abnormalities, the cause may be a drug, an allergic reaction that has internal effects, or a systemic disorder.■ Skin care measures (such as limiting bathing, moisturizing the skin, and humidifying the air) can usually help relieve itching.■ Itching can usually be relieved by topical or systemic treatments.