Menopause: Treatment for Symptoms
Tips from the National Institute on Aging.

Larissa is 52. She’s excited to be starting a new
phase of her life as her children leave home and she
has more time for her other interests. She’s looking
forward to traveling and taking a computer class.
But, recent health changes have been getting in
the way of her plans. Larissa has been having
irregular periods for the past few months. Now,
she’s getting hot flashes and having trouble
sleeping. The hot flashes, which cause her body
and face to heat up quickly and uncomfortably,
are waking her up several times a night. Larissa
is tired and irritable from lack of sleep and fed up
with the hot flashes. She is ready to talk with her
doctor about finding some relief.
Larissa is experiencing the menopausal transition, a
normal part of aging. It is not a disease or disorder.
After the menopausal transition, many women feel
relieved they no longer have to worry about painful
periods, cramps, or getting pregnant.
Some women don’t have any trouble with menopausal
symptoms. For others, the menopausal transition
can bring hot flashes, trouble sleeping, moodiness
and irritability, pain during sex, or depression.
Some may decide to talk with their doctor about
treatments for their symptoms.
There are many factors to consider when thinking
about treating menopausal symptoms.
What Is Menopause?
The menopausal transition most often begins
between ages 45 and 55. It usually lasts about
7 years but can last as long as 14 years. During the
menopausal transition, the body’s production of
estrogen and progesterone, two hormones made
by the ovaries, varies greatly. Bones also become
less dense, making women more vulnerable to
fractures. During this period, too, the body begins
to use energy differently, fat cells change, and
women may gain weight more easily.
This time in a woman’s life is often full of other
transitions—not just physical ones. Women may
be caring for aging parents or relatives, supporting
their children as they move into adulthood, or
taking on new responsibilities at work.
Is It Menopause?
If you are having symptoms commonly associated
with the menopausal transition, your doctor may
ask questions about your age, symptoms, and family
history to determine if it really is the menopausal
transition causing your symptoms. In some cases,
your doctor may suggest a blood test to check your
FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone) and estradiol
(E2) levels to rule out any other causes for the
changes you’re experiencing.
The menopausal transition, sometimes called
perimenopause, begins several years before a 
woman’s last period. During this time, women may
experience spotty menstrual cycles, hot flashes,
and other changes. While this time is commonly
referred to as “menopause,” menopause doesn’t
happen until 1 year after the final menstrual period.
After menopause, women enter post-menopause.
Post-menopausal women are more vulnerable
to heart disease and osteoporosis. At this time, it
is important to eat a healthy diet and make sure
you get lots of calcium to keep your bones strong.
A woman who doesn’t want to get pregnant
should continue to use birth control for at least
a full 12 months after her last period.
What Are the Symptoms of Menopause?
Many women experience very mild symptoms that
are easily treated by lifestyle changes, like avoiding
caffeine or carrying a portable fan to use when a
hot flash strikes. Some women don’t require any
treatment at all. Other symptoms can be more
problematic. Common symptoms include:
▪Hot flashes.
▪Disturbed sleep.
▪Mood swings, depression, or anxiety.
▪Vaginal dryness and pain during sex.
In addition, in some women, symptoms may
include aches and pains, headaches, and heart
palpitations. Since menopausal symptoms may
be caused by changing hormone levels, it is
unpredictable how often women will have hot
flashes and other symptoms and how severe they
will be. Talk with your doctor if these symptoms
are interfering with your everyday life. The
severity of symptoms varies greatly around the
world and by race and ethnicity.
This tip sheet explores treatment options for
common symptoms of the menopausal transition.
Hot Flashes: What Can I Do?
Hot flashes are uncomfortable and can last for
many years. When they happen at night, hot
flashes are called night sweats. Some women find
that hot flashes interrupt their daily lives. The
earlier in life hot flashes begin, the longer you may
experience them. Research has found that African
American and Hispanic women get hot flashes for
more years than white and Asian women.
You may decide you don’t need to change
your lifestyle or investigate treatment options
because your symptoms are mild. But, if you are
bothered by hot flashes, there are some steps
you can take. Try to take note of what triggers
your hot flashes and how much they bother you.
This can help you make better decisions about
managing your symptoms.
Lifestyle Changes to Improve Hot Flashes
Before considering medication, first try making
changes to your lifestyle. Doctors recommend
women make changes like these for at least 3
months before starting any medication.
▪If hot flashes are keeping you up at night,
keep your bedroom cooler and try drinking
small amounts of cold water before bed.
Layer your bedding so it can be adjusted as
needed. Some women find a device called a
bed fan helpful.
▪Carry a portable fan to use when a hot flash
strikes.
▪Avoid alcohol, spicy foods, and caffeine.
These can make menopausal symptoms
worse.
▪If you smoke, try to quit, not only for
menopausal symptoms, but for your overall
health.
▪Try to maintain a healthy weight. Women
who are overweight or obese may experience
more frequent and severe hot flashes.
▪Try mind-body practices like yoga or other
self-calming techniques. Early-stage research
has shown that mindfulness meditation,
yoga, and tai chi may help improve
menopausal symptoms. 
Medications: Non-Hormone Options for
Treating Hot Flashes.
If lifestyle changes are not enough to improve your
symptoms, non-hormone options for managing
hot flashes may work for you. They may be a good
choice if you are unable to take hormones or if you
are worried about their potential risks.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has
approved the use of paroxetine, a low-dose selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressant,
to treat hot flashes. Researchers are studying the
effectiveness of other antidepressants in this class.
Women who use an antidepressant to help manage
hot flashes generally take a lower dose than those
who use the medication to treat depression. Side
effects depend on the type of antidepressant you
take and can include dizziness, headache, nausea,
jitteriness, or drowsiness. As with any medication,
talk with your doctor about whether this is the right
medication for you and how you can manage any
possible side effects.
Medications: Treating Hot Flashes and
Night Sweats With Hormones.
Some women may choose to take hormones to treat
their hot flashes. A hormone is a chemical substance
made by an organ like the thyroid gland or ovary.
During the menopausal transition, the ovaries begin
to work less and less well, and the production of
hormones like estrogen and progesterone declines
over time. It is believed that such changes cause hot
flashes and other menopausal symptoms.
Hormone therapy steadies the levels of estrogen
and progesterone in the body. It is a very effective
treatment for hot flashes in women who are able
to use it. There are risks associated with taking
hormones, including increased risk of heart attack,
stroke, blood clots, breast cancer, gallbladder
disease, and dementia. The risks vary by a woman’s
age and whether she has had a hysterectomy.
Women are encouraged to discuss the risks with
their healthcare provider.
Women who still have a uterus should take
estrogen combined with progesterone or another
therapy to protect the uterus. Progesterone is added
to estrogen to protect the uterus against cancer,
but it also seems to increase the risk of blood
clots and stroke. Hormones should be used at the
lowest dose that is effective for the shortest period
of time possible. (See What Are the Risks of Using
Hormones for Hot Flashes? on page 4.)
Some women should not use hormones for their
hot flashes. You should not take hormones for
menopausal symptoms if:
▪	 You have had certain kinds of cancers, like
breast cancer or uterine cancer.
▪	 You have had a stroke or heart attack, or
you have a strong family history of stroke or
heart disease.
▪	 You have had blood clots.
▪	 You have had problems with vaginal
bleeding or have a bleeding disorder.
▪	 You have liver disease.
▪	 You think you are pregnant or may become
pregnant.
▪	 You have had allergic reactions to hormone
medications.
Talk with your doctor to find out if taking
hormones to treat your symptoms is right for you.
Should I Take Hormones for My Hot
Flashes?
Hormones can be very effective at reducing the
number and severity of hot flashes. They are also
effective in reducing vaginal dryness and bone loss.
Hormone treatments (sometimes called menopausal
hormone therapy) can take the form of pills, patches,
rings, implants, gels, or creams. Patches, which stick
to the skin, may be best for women with cardiac risk
factors, such as a family history of heart disease.
There are many types of hormones available for
women to treat hot flashes. These include estradiol,
conjugated estrogen, selective estrogen receptor
modulators (SERMs), and compounded or synthetic
hormones. It is a common misconception that
synthetic (“bioidentical”) hormones mixed by a
compounding pharmacist are safer and less risky
than other hormone therapies. This is not the case.
We must assume they have the same risks as any
hormone therapy.
Some of the relatively mild side effects of hormone
use include breast tenderness, spotting or return
of monthly periods, cramping, or bloating. By
changing the type or amount of the hormones, the
way they are taken, or the timing of the doses, your
doctor may be able to help control these side effects
or, over time, they may go away on their own.
What Are the Risks of Using Hormones
for Hot Flashes?
In 2002, a study that was part of the Women’s
Health Initiative (WHI), funded by the National
Institutes of Health, was stopped early because
participants who received a certain kind of
estrogen with progesterone were found to have a
significantly higher risk of stroke, heart attacks,
breast cancer, dementia, urinary incontinence, and
gallbladder disease.
This study raised significant concerns at the time and
left many women wary of using hormones.
However, research reported since then found that
younger women may be at less risk and have more
potential benefits than was suggested by the WHI
study. The negative effects of the WHI hormone
treatments mostly affected women who were over
age 60 and post-menopausal. Newer versions of
treatments developed since 2002 may reduce the
risks of using hormones for women experiencing
the menopausal transition, but studies are needed
to evaluate the long-term safety of these newer
treatments.
If you use hormone therapy, it should be at the
lowest dose, for the shortest period of time it
remains effective, and in consultation with a
doctor. Talk with your doctor about your medical
and family history and any concerns or questions
about taking hormones.
Buyer Beware: Unproven,
Nonscientific “Treatments” for
Hot Flashes
You may have heard about black cohosh,
DHEA, or soy isoflavones from friends
who are using them to try to treat their
hot flashes. These products are not
proven to be effective, and some carry
risks like liver damage. At this time, it is
unknown whether herbs or other “natural”
products are helpful or safe. The benefits
and risks are still being studied. Always
talk with your doctor before taking any
herb or supplement to improve your hot
flashes or other menopausal symptoms.
Sleep Problems and Menopause: What
Can I Do?
The years of the menopausal transition are often
a time when there are other changes in a woman’s
life. You may be caring for aging parents, supporting children as they move into adulthood, and
reflecting on your own life journey. Add hot flashes
on top of all this, and you may find yourself having
trouble sleeping at night.
Not getting enough sleep can affect all areas of
life. Lack of sleep can make you feel irritable or
depressed, might cause you to be more forgetful
than normal, and could lead you to have more falls
or accidents.
Some women who have trouble sleeping may use
over-the-counter sleep aids like melatonin. Others
use prescription medicines to help them sleep,
which may help when used for a short time. But
remember, medicines are not a cure for insomnia.
Developing healthy habits at bedtime can help you
get a good night’s sleep.
Getting a Good Night’s Sleep During
the Menopausal Transition
To improve your sleep through the menopausal
transition and beyond:
▪	 Follow a regular sleep schedule. Go to sleep
and get up at the same time each day.
▪	 Avoid napping in the late afternoon or
evening if you can. It may keep you awake at
night.
▪	 Develop a bedtime routine. Some people
read a book, listen to soothing music, or soak
in a warm bath.
▪	 Try not to watch television or use your
computer or mobile device in the bedroom.
The light from these devices may make it
difficult for you to fall asleep.
▪	 Keep your bedroom at a comfortable
temperature, not too hot or too cold, and as
quiet as possible.
▪	 Exercise at regular times each day but not
close to bedtime.
▪	 Avoid eating large meals close to bedtime.
▪	 Stay away from caffeine (found in some
coffees, teas, or chocolate) late in the day.
▪	 Remember, alcohol won’t help you sleep. Even
small amounts make it harder to stay asleep.
If these changes to your bedtime routine don’t help
as much as you’d like, you may want to consider
cognitive behavioral therapy. This problem-solving
approach to therapy has recently been shown to
help sleep disturbances in women with menopausal
symptoms. Cognitive behavioral therapy can be
found through a class or in one-on-one sessions.
Be sure that your therapy is guided by a trained
professional with experience working with women
during their menopausal transition. Your doctor
may be able to recommend a therapist in your area.
Having Sex Is Becoming Painful: What
Can I Do?
Some women have vaginal dryness when their
bodies experience the menopausal transition.
This can make sex painful. Women may also
experience a tightening of the vaginal opening,
burning, itching, and dryness (called vaginal
atrophy). Fortunately, there are options for women
to address these issues. Talk with your doctor if you
are having this problem—he or she can suggest
treatment options.
Treating Vaginal Dryness and Pain
During Sex
Pain during sexual activity is called dyspareunia.
Like other symptoms of the menopausal transition,
dyspareunia may be minor and not greatly affect
a woman’s quality of life. However, some women
experience severe dyspareunia that prevents them
from engaging in any sexual activity.
You may find relief from vaginal dryness using
water-based lubricants or vaginal moisturizers,
which can be found at most grocery and drug
stores. Vaginal moisturizers differ from lubricants.
They are to be used regularly—not just during
sex—to replenish vaginal moisture and relieve
vaginal dryness. Do not use petroleum jelly for this
purpose; oil-based products can cause irritation.
If your symptoms are not improved by using waterbased lubricants or vaginal moisturizers, hormones
may help. Local vaginal treatments (like estrogen
creams, rings, or tablets) are often used to treat this
symptom and provide lower hormone doses to the
rest of the body than a pill or patch.
Hormones aren’t the only option for treating
vaginal dryness and dyspareunia. The FDA
has approved a non-hormone medicine (called
ospemifene) to treat moderate to severe dyspareunia
caused by vaginal changes that occur with
menopause. Your doctor can tell you about the
risks and benefits of this medicine.
Other Menopause Symptoms and
Treatments
For most women, hot flashes and trouble sleeping
are the biggest problems associated with menopause.
But, some women have other symptoms, such as
irritability and mood swings, anxiety and depression,
headaches, and even heart palpitations.

Many of these problems, like mood swings and
depression, are often improved by getting a better
night’s sleep. Discussing mood issues with your
doctor can help you identify the cause, screen for
severe depression, and choose the most appropriate
intervention. For depression, your doctor may
prescribe an antidepressant medication.
If you want to change your lifestyle to see if you can
reduce your symptoms, or if you decide any of your
symptoms are severe enough to need treatment,
talk with your doctor.
Treating Menopause Symptoms:
What’s Right for Me?
Deciding whether and how to treat the symptoms
of the menopausal transition can be very complicated
and personal. Discuss your symptoms, family and
medical history, and preferences with your doctor.
No matter what you decide, see your doctor every
year to talk about your treatment plan and discuss
any changes you want to make. 