Mourning the Death of a Spouse.
When your spouse dies, your world
changes. You are in mourning—feeling
grief and sorrow at the loss. You may feel
numb, shocked, and fearful. You may feel
guilty for being the one who is still alive.
At some point, you may even feel angry
at your spouse for leaving you. All of
these feelings are normal. There are no
rules about how you should feel. There is
no right or wrong way to mourn.
When you grieve, you can feel both
physical and emotional pain. People
who are grieving often cry easily and
can have:
■ Trouble sleeping.
■ Little interest in food.
■ Problems with concentration.
■ A hard time making decisions.
In addition to dealing with feelings
of loss, you also may need to put your
own life back together. This can be hard
work. Some people feel better sooner
than they expect. Others may take longer.
Family, friends, and faith may be sources of
support. Grief counseling or grief therapy
also is helpful to some people.
As time passes, you may still miss your
spouse. But for most people, the intense
pain will lessen. There will be good and
bad days. You will know you are feeling
better when there are more good days
than bad. Don’t feel guilty if you laugh
at a joke or enjoy a visit with a friend.
For some people, mourning can go
on so long that it becomes unhealthy.
This can be a sign of serious depression
and anxiety. Talk with your doctor if
sadness keeps you from carrying on with
your day-to-day life. Support may be
available until you can manage the grief
on your own.
What Can You Do?
In the beginning, you may find that
taking care of details and keeping busy
helps. For a while, family and friends may
be around to assist you. But, there comes
a time when you will have to face the
change in your life.

Here are some ideas to keep in mind:
■ Take care of yourself. Grief can be
hard on your health. Exercise regularly,
eat healthy food, and get enough sleep.
Bad habits, such as drinking too much
alcohol or smoking, can put your health
at risk.
■ Try to eat right. Some widowed
people lose interest in cooking and
eating. It may help to have lunch with
friends. Sometimes, eating at home
alone feels too quiet. Turning on the
radio or TV during meals can help. For
information on nutrition and cooking
for one, look for helpful books at your
local library or bookstore or online.
■ Talk with caring friends. Let family
and friends know when you want to talk
about your spouse. They may be grieving
too and may welcome the chance to
share memories. Accept their offers of
help and company, when possible.
■ Join a grief support group.
Sometimes, it helps to talk with people
who also are grieving. Check with
hospitals, religious communities, and
local agencies to find out about support
groups. Choose a support group where
you feel comfortable sharing your feelings
and concerns. Members of support groups
often have helpful ideas or know of useful
resources based on their own experiences.
Online support groups make it possible to
get help without leaving home.
■ Visit with members of your
religious community. Many people
who are grieving find comfort in their
faith. Praying, talking with others of
your faith, reading religious or spiritual
texts, or listening to uplifting music also
may bring comfort.
■ Try not to make any major changes
right away. It’s a good idea to wait for a
while before making big decisions, like
moving or changing jobs.
■ See your doctor. Keep up with your
usual visits to your healthcare provider.
If it has been awhile, schedule a physical
and bring your doctor up to date on any
pre-existing medical conditions. Talk
about any new health issues that may be
of concern. Be sure to let your healthcare
provider know if you are having trouble
taking care of your everyday activities,
like getting dressed or fixing meals.
■ Don’t be afraid to seek professional
help. Sometimes, short-term talk
therapy with a counselor can help.
■ Remember that your children are
grieving, too. It will take time for the
whole family to adjust to life without
your spouse. You may find that your
relationship with your children and
their relationships with each other have 

changed. Open, honest communication
is important.
■ Mourning takes time. It’s common to
have rollercoaster emotions for a while.
Does Everyone Feel the Same
Way?
Men and women share many of the
same feelings when a spouse dies. Both
may deal with the pain of loss, and both
may worry about the future. But, there
also can be differences.
Many married couples divide up their
household tasks. One person may pay
bills and handle car repairs. The other
person may cook meals and mow the
lawn. Splitting up jobs often works well
until there is only one person who has to
do it all. Learning to manage new tasks—
from chores to household repairs to
finances—takes time, but it can be done.
Being alone can increase concerns
about safety. It’s a good idea to make
sure there are working locks on the
doors and windows. If you need help,
ask your family or friends.
Facing the future without a husband or
wife can be scary. Many men and women
have never lived alone. Those who are
both widowed and retired may feel very
lonely and become depressed. Talk with
your doctor about how you are feeling.
Take Charge of Your Life
After years of being part of a couple,
it can be upsetting to be alone. Many
people find it helps to have things to do
every day. Whether you are still working
or are retired, write down your weekly
plans. You might:
■ Take a walk with a friend.
■ Visit the library.
■ Volunteer.
■ Try an exercise class.
■ Join a singing group.
■ Join a bowling league.
■ Offer to watch your grandchildren.
■ Consider adopting a pet.
■ Take a class at a nearby senior center,
college, or recreation center.
■ Stay in touch with family and
friends, either in person or online.
Is There More to Do?
When you feel stronger, you should
think about getting your legal and
financial affairs in order. For example,
you might need to:
■ Write a new will and advance directive.
■ Look into a durable power of
attorney for legal matters and health.
care, in case you are unable to make your
own medical decisions in the future.
■ Put joint property (such as a house or
car) in your name.
■ Check on changes you might need to
make to your health insurance as well as
your life, car, and homeowner’s insurance.
■ Sign up for Medicare by your 65th
birthday.
■ Make a list of bills you will need to pay
in the next few months: for instance, State
and Federal taxes and your rent
or mortgage.
When you are ready, go through your
husband’s or wife’s clothes and other
personal items. It may be hard to give
away these belongings. Instead of parting
with everything at once, you might make
three piles: one to keep, one to give away,
and one “not sure.” Ask your children
or others to help. Think about setting
aside items like a special piece of clothing,
watch, favorite book, or picture to give
to your children or grandchildren as
personal reminders of your spouse.
What about Going Out?
Having a social life on your own
can be tough. It may be hard to think
about going to parties or other social
events by yourself. It can be hard to
think about coming home alone. You
may be anxious about dating. Many
people miss the feeling of closeness that
marriage brings. After time, some are
ready to have a social life again.
Here are some things to remember:
■ Go at a comfortable pace. There’s no
rush.
■ It’s okay to make the first move when
it comes to planning things to do.
■ Try group activities. Invite friends for
a potluck dinner or go to a senior center.
■ With married friends, think about
informal outings like walks, picnics, or
movies rather than couple’s events that
remind you of the past.
■ Find an activity you like. You may have
fun and meet people who like to do the
same thing.
■ You can develop meaningful
relationships with friends and family
members of all ages.
■ Many people find that pets provide
important companionship.