Smell and Taste:
Spice of Life.
Sally looked forward to Thanksgiving dinner
at her daughter’s house every year. She loved
the smell of the turkey and all the fixings. She
couldn’t wait to dig in. But, this year it didn’t
smell like Thanksgiving and, when Sally ate
the holiday food, she felt let down. It wasn’t as
tasty as she remembered. No one else seemed
to notice. Sally wondered what might be
wrong, could her senses be the problem?
Did you know that your sense of smell
and taste are connected? As you get
older, these senses can change, and, like
Sally, you may find that certain foods
aren’t as flavorful as they used to be.
Changes in smell or taste can also be a
sign of a larger problem.

Your Sense of Smell.
Smell is an important sense. Certain
smells, like your dad’s cologne, can
help you recall a memory. Other smells,
like smoke from a fire, can alert you to
danger. When you can’t smell things you
enjoy, like your morning coffee or spring
flowers, life may seem dull.
As you get older, your sense of smell
may fade. Your sense of smell is closely
related to your sense of taste. When you
can’t smell, food may taste bland. You
may even lose interest in eating.

What Causes Loss of Smell?
Many problems cause a loss of
smell that lasts for a short time. This
temporary loss of smell may be due to:
■ A cold or flu that causes a stuffy nose.
The ability to smell will come back when
you’re better.
■ Allergies. Try to stay away from things
you’re allergic to, like pollen and pets. Talk
to your doctor about how to manage your
allergies.
■ A harmless growth (called a polyp) in
the nose or sinuses that gives you a runny
nose. Having the growth removed may
help.
■ Some medications like antibiotics or
blood pressure medicine. Ask your doctor
if there is another medicine you can take.
■ Radiation, chemotherapy, and other
cancer treatments. Your sense of smell may
return when treatment stops.
Some things can cause a long lasting
loss of smell. A head injury, for example,
can damage the nerves related to smell.

Sometimes, losing your sense of smell
may be a sign of a more serious disorder,
such as Parkinson’s disease or Alzheimer’s
disease. Be sure to tell your doctor about
any change in your sense of smell.

Smells Can Keep You Safe
It’s important to be aware of odors
around you. You need to be able to smell:
■ Smoke: check your smoke detectors
once a year to make sure they work.
■ Gas leaks: make sure you have a gas
detector in your home.
■ Spoiled food: throw out food that’s
been in the refrigerator too long.
■ Household chemicals: make sure
there is fresh air where you live and work.

Your Sense of Taste.
There are tiny taste buds inside your
mouth on your tongue, in your throat,
even on the roof of your mouth. What we
call “flavor” is based on five basic tastes:
sweet, salty, bitter, sour, and savory. Along
with how it tastes, how food smells is also
part of what makes up its flavor.
When food tastes bland, many people
try to improve the flavor by adding
more salt or sugar. This may not be
healthy for older people, especially if you
have medical problems like high blood
pressure or diabetes (high blood sugar).
People who have lost some of their
sense of taste may not eat the foods they
need to stay healthy. This can lead to
other issues such as:
■ Weight loss.
■ Malnutrition (not getting the calories,
protein, carbohydrates, vitamins, and
minerals you need from the food).
■ Social isolation.
■ Depression.
Eating food that is good for you is
important to your health. If you have a
problem with how food tastes, be sure to
talk with your doctor.

What Causes Loss of Taste?
Many things can cause you to lose
your sense of taste. Most of the time
there are ways to help with the problem.
Medications, like antibiotics and pills
to lower cholesterol and blood pressure,
can sometimes change how food tastes.
Some medicines can make your mouth
dry. Having a dry mouth can cause food
to taste funny and also make it hard to
swallow. Talk to your doctor if you think a
medicine is affecting your sense of taste.
There may be different medicines that you
can try. Do not stop taking your medicine.
Gum disease, an infection in your
mouth, or issues with your dentures can
leave a bad taste in your mouth that
changes the way food tastes. Brushing
your teeth, flossing, and using mouthwash
can help prevent these problems. Talk
to your dentist if you have a bad taste in
your mouth that won’t go away.
Alcohol can alter how food tastes.
Cutting back or stopping drinking may
help. Smoking can also reduce your
sense of taste. Quitting may help.

Cancer Treatments and Taste
People who are having cancer
treatments might have a problem with
taste. Your sense of taste will often return
once treatments stop.
Cancer treatments can make food
taste bad or “off.” Some say that food
tastes metallic. This funny taste may
keep some people from eating healthy
food. If this happens to you, try to:
■ Eat four or five small meals during the
day instead of three large meals.
■ Eat cold food, including yogurt,
pudding, and gelatin dessert. Cold food
may taste better than hot food.
■ Eat fresh, uncooked vegetables.
Cooked vegetables can have strong odors
that may not be appealing.
■ Drink lots of fluids, including water,
weak tea, juice, and ginger ale.
■ Test new foods to find ones you like.
■ Brush your teeth before and after
eating.
■ Use plastic forks and spoons if food
tastes metallic.

Colors and Spices Can Help.
If you’re having trouble smelling
and tasting your food, try adding color
and texture to make your food more
interesting. For example, try eating
brightly colored vegetables like carrots,
sweet potatoes, broccoli, and tomatoes.
Also, if your diet allows, flavor your
food with a little butter, olive oil, cheese,
nuts, or fresh herbs like sage, thyme, or
rosemary. To put some zing in your food,
add mustard, hot pepper, onions, garlic,
ginger, different spices, or lemon or lime
juice. Choose foods that look good to you.

Special Doctor for Smell and
Taste, an Otolaryngologist
If the foods you enjoy don’t smell or
taste the way you think they should, talk
to your doctor. He or she might suggest
you see a specialist who treats people
with smell and taste problems. This kind
of doctor is called an otolaryngologist
, also known as an ENT (which stands for ear, nose,
and throat). An otolaryngologist works
on problems related to the ear, nose, and
throat, as well as the larynx (voice box),
mouth, and parts of the neck and face.
The doctor may ask:
■ Can you smell anything at all?
■ Can you taste any food?
■ When did you first notice the
problem?
■ Is the problem getting worse?
■ Have you been told that you have
allergies or chronic sinus problems?
■ What medicines do you take?
There are likely ways to help fix the
problem. If not, the doctor can help you
cope with the changes in smell and taste.
Shots for Safety
As you get older, your doctor may
recommend vaccinations shots: to help
prevent certain illnesses and to keep
you healthy.
Talk with your doctor about which of
the following shots you need. And, make
sure to protect yourself by keeping your
vaccinations up to date.

Flu.
Flu, short for influenza, is a virus that
can cause fever, chills, sore throat, stuffy
nose, headache, and muscle aches. Flu is
very serious when it gets in your lungs.
The flu is easy to pass from person
to person. The virus also changes over
time, which means you can get it over
and over again. That’s why most people
(age 6 months and older) should get the
flu shot each year.
Get your shot between September and
November. Then, you may be protected
when the winter flu season starts.

Pneumococcal Disease.
Pneumococcal disease is a serious
infection that spreads from person to
person by air. It often causes pneumonia
in the lungs, and it can affect other parts
of the body.
Most people age 65 and older should
get a pneumococcal shot to help prevent
getting the disease. It’s generally safe
and can be given at the same time as
the flu shot. Usually, people only need
the shot once. But, if you were younger
than age 65 when you had the shot, you
may need a second one to stay protected.

Tetanus and Diphtheria.
Tetanus (sometimes called lockjaw)
is caused by bacteria found in soil, dust,
and manure. It enters the body through
cuts in the skin.
Diphtheria is also caused by bacteria.
It is a serious illness that can affect the
tonsils, throat, nose, or skin. It can spread
from person to person.
Both tetanus and diphtheria can lead
to death.
Getting a shot is the best way to keep
from getting tetanus and diphtheria. Most
people get their first shots as children. For
adults, a booster shot every 10 years will
keep you protected. Ask your doctor if
and when you need a booster shot.

Shingles.
Shingles is caused by the same virus
as chickenpox. If you had chickenpox,
the virus is still in your body. It could
become active again and cause shingles.
Shingles affects the nerves. Common
symptoms include burning, shooting
pain, tingling, and/ or itching, as well
as a rash and fluid filled blisters. Even
when the rash disappears, the pain can
stay.
The shingles vaccine is a safe and
easy shot that may keep you from getting
the disease. Most people age 60 and older
should get vaccinated, even if you already
had shingles or don’t remember having
chickenpox. Protection from the shingles
vaccine lasts at least 5 years.

Measles, Mumps, and Rubella
Measles, mumps, and rubella
are viruses that cause several flu like
symptoms, but may lead to much more
serious, long term health problems,
especially in adults.
The vaccine given to children to
prevent measles, mumps, and rubella
has made these diseases rare. If you
don’t know if you’ve had the diseases or
the shot, you can still get the vaccine.

Side Effects of Shots.
Common side effects for all these
shots are mild and include pain, swelling,
or redness where the shot was given.
Before getting any vaccine, make sure
it’s safe for you. Talk with your doctor
about your health history, including
past illnesses and treatments, as well as
any allergies.
It’s a good idea to keep your own
shot record, listing the types and dates
of your shots, along with any side
effects or problems.

Shots for Travel.
Check with your doctor or local
health department about shots you will
need if traveling to other countries.
Sometimes, a series of shots is needed.
It’s best to get them at least 2 weeks
before you travel. 

Sexuality in Later Life.
Many people want and need to
be close to others as they grow older.
For some, this includes the desire to
continue an active, satisfying sex life.
With aging, that may mean adapting
sexual activity to accommodate
physical, health, and other changes.
There are many different ways to
have sex and be intimate, alone or
with a partner. The expression of your
sexuality could include many types of
touch or stimulation. Some adults may
choose not to engage in sexual activity,
and that’s also normal.
Here, we explore some of the
common problems older adults may
face with sex.

What Are Normal Changes?
Normal aging brings physical
changes in both men and women.
These changes sometimes affect the
ability to have and enjoy sex.
A woman may notice changes in
her vagina. As a woman ages, her
vagina can shorten and narrow. Her
vaginal walls can become thinner and
a little stiffer. Most women will have
less vaginal lubrication, and it may take
more time for the vagina to naturally
lubricate itself. These changes could
make certain types of sexual activity,
such as vaginal penetration, painful
or less desirable. If vaginal dryness is
an issue, using water based lubricating
jelly or lubricated condoms may be
more comfortable. If a woman is using
hormone therapy to treat hot flashes or
other menopausal symptoms, she may
want to have sex more often than she
did before hormone therapy.
As men get older, impotence (also
called erectile dysfunction)
becomes more common. Erectile dysfunction is the loss
of ability to have and keep an erection.
Erectile dysfunction may cause a man to take longer
to have an erection. His erection may
not be as firm or as large as it used to
be. The loss of erection after orgasm
may happen more quickly, or it may
take longer before another erection
is possible. Erectile dysfunction is not a problem if it
happens every now and then, but if it
occurs often, talk with your doctor.
Talk with your partner about these
changes and how you are feeling. Your
doctor may have suggestions to help
make sex easier.

What Causes Sexual Problems?
Some illnesses, disabilities, medicines,
and surgeries can affect your ability to
have and enjoy sex.
Arthritis. Joint pain due to arthritis
can make sexual contact uncomfortable.
Exercise, drugs, and possibly joint
replacement surgery may help relieve
this pain. Rest, warm baths, and
changing the position or timing of
sexual activity can be helpful.
Chronic pain. Pain can interfere with
intimacy between older people. Chronic
pain does not have to be part of growing
older and can often be treated. But,
some pain medicines can interfere with
sexual function. Always talk with your
doctor if you have side effects from any
medication.
Dementia. Some people with
dementia show increased interest in
sex and physical closeness, but they
may not be able to judge what is
appropriate sexual behavior. Those
with severe dementia may not recognize
their spouse or partner, but they still
desire sexual contact and may seek it
with someone else. It can be confusing
and difficult to know how to handle this
situation. Here, too, talking with a doctor,
nurse, or social worker with training in
dementia care may be helpful.
Diabetes. This is one of the illnesses
that can cause erectile dysfunction in some men. In most
cases, medical treatment can help. Less
is known about how diabetes affects
sexuality in older women. Women with
diabetes are more likely to have vaginal
yeast infections, which can cause
itching and irritation and make sex
uncomfortable or undesirable. Yeast
infections can be treated.
Heart disease. Narrowing and
hardening of the arteries can change
blood vessels so that blood does not flow
freely. As a result, men and women may
have problems with orgasms. For both
men and women, it may take longer to
become aroused, and for some men, it
may be difficult to have or maintain an
erection. People who have had a heart
attack, or their partners, may be afraid
that having sex will cause another attack.
Even though sexual activity is generally
safe, always follow your doctor’s advice. If
your heart problems get worse and you
have chest pain or shortness of breath
even while resting, your doctor may want
to change your treatment plan.
Incontinence. Loss of bladder control
or leaking of urine is more common as
people, especially women, grow older.
Extra pressure on the belly during sex
can cause loss of urine. This can be
helped by changing positions or by
emptying the bladder before and after
sex. The good news is that incontinence
can usually be treated.
Stroke. The ability to have sex is
sometimes affected by a stroke. A change
in positions or medical devices may
help people with ongoing weakness or
paralysis to have sex. Some people with
paralysis from the waist down are still
able to experience orgasm and pleasure.
Depression. Lack of interest in
activities you used to enjoy, such as
intimacy and sexual activity, can be a
symptom of depression. It’s sometimes
hard to know if you’re depressed. Talk
with your doctor. Depression can be
treated.
Surgery. Many of us worry about
having any kind of surgery, it may be
even more troubling when the breasts
or genital area are involved. Most
people do return to the kind of sex life
they enjoyed before surgery.
Hysterectomy is surgery to remove
a woman’s uterus because of pain,
bleeding, fibroids, or other reasons.
Often, when an older woman has a
hysterectomy, the ovaries are also
removed. Deciding whether to have
this surgery can leave both women
and their partners worried about their
future sex life. If you’re concerned about
any changes you might experience
with a hysterectomy, talk with your
gynecologist or surgeon.
Mastectomy is surgery to remove all or
part of a woman’s breast because of breast
cancer. This surgery may cause some
women to lose their sexual interest, or it
may leave them feeling less desirable or
attractive to their partners. In addition
to talking with your doctor, sometimes
it is useful to talk with other women
who have had this surgery. Programs
like the American Cancer Society’s
“Reach to Recovery” can be helpful for
both women and men. If you want your
breast rebuilt (reconstruction), talk to your
cancer doctor or surgeon.
Prostatectomy is surgery that removes
all or part of a man’s prostate because
of cancer or an enlarged prostate. It
may cause urinary incontinence or erectile dysfunction.
If you need this operation, talk with
your doctor before surgery about your
concerns.
Medications. Some drugs can
cause sexual problems. These include
some blood pressure medicines,
antihistamines, antidepressants,
tranquilizers, Parkinson’s disease
or cancer medications, appetite
suppressants, drugs for mental problems,
and ulcer drugs. Some can lead to erectile dysfunction
or make it hard for men to ejaculate.
Some drugs can reduce a woman’s
sexual desire or cause vaginal dryness
or difficulty with arousal and orgasm.
Check with your doctor to see if there is
a different drug without this side effect.
Alcohol. Too much alcohol can cause
erection problems in men and delay
orgasm in women.

Am I Too Old to Worry About
Safe Sex?
Age does not protect you from
sexually transmitted diseases. Older
people who are sexually active may
be at risk for diseases such as syphilis,
gonorrhea, chlamydial infection, genital
herpes, hepatitis B, genital warts, and
trichomoniasis.
Almost anyone who is sexually active is
also at risk of being infected with HIV, the
virus that causes AIDS. The number of
older people with HIV/AIDS is growing.
You are at risk for HIV/AIDS if you or
your partner has more than one sexual
partner, if you are having unprotected
sex, or if either you or your partner is
sharing needles. To protect yourself,
always use a condom during sex that
involves vaginal or anal penetration.
A man needs to have a full erection
before putting on a condom.
Talk with your doctor about ways
to protect yourself from all sexually
transmitted diseases and infections.
Go for regular checkups and testing.
Talk with your partner. You are never
too old to be at risk.

Can Emotions Play a Part?
Sexuality is often a delicate balance
of emotional and physical issues. How
you feel may affect what you are able to
do and what you want to do. Many older
couples find greater satisfaction in their
sex lives than they did when they were
younger. In many cases, they have fewer
distractions, more time and privacy, no
worries about getting pregnant, and
greater intimacy with a lifelong partner.
As we age, our bodies change,
including our weight, skin, and muscle
tone, and some older adults don’t feel
as comfortable in their aging bodies.
Older adults, men and women alike,
may worry that their partners will no
longer find them attractive. Aging related sexual problems like the ones
listed above can cause stress and
worry. This worry can get in the way
of enjoying a fulfilling sex life.
Older couples face the same daily
stresses that affect people of any
age. They may also have the added
concerns of illness, retirement, and
lifestyle changes, all of which may lead
to sexual difficulties. Talk openly with
your partner, and try not to blame
yourself or your partner. You may also
find it helpful to talk with a therapist,
either alone or with your partner.
Some therapists have special training
in helping with sexual problems. If you
sense changes in your partner’s attitude
toward sex, don’t assume they are no
longer interested in you or in an active
sex life. Talk about it. Many of the
things that cause sexual problems in
older adults can be helped.

What Can I Do?
There are things you can do on
your own for an active and enjoyable
sex life. If you have a long term
partner, take time to enjoy each other
and to understand the changes you
both are facing.
Don’t be afraid to talk with your
doctor if you have a problem that affects
your sex life. He or she may be able to
suggest a treatment. For example, the
most common sexual difficulty of older
women is painful intercourse caused
by vaginal dryness. Your doctor or a
pharmacist can suggest over the counter
vaginal lubricants or moisturizers to use.
Water based lubricants are helpful when
needed to make sex more comfortable.
Moisturizers are used on a regular basis,
every 2 or 3 days. Or, your doctor might
suggest a form of vaginal estrogen.
If erectile dysfunction is the problem, it can often be
managed and perhaps even reversed
with medication or other treatments.
There are pills that can help. They
should not be used by men taking
medicines containing nitrates, such as
nitroglycerin. The pills do have possible
side effects. Be wary of any dietary or
herbal supplements promising to treat
erectile dysfunction. Always talk to your doctor before
taking any herb or supplement.
Physical problems can change your
sex life as you get older. If you are single,
dating and meeting new people may be
easier later in life when you’re more sure
of yourself and what you want. If you’re
in a relationship, you and your partner
may discover new ways to be together
as you get older. Talk to your partner
or partners about your needs. You may
find that affection such as hugging, kissing,
touching, and spending time together, 
can be just what you need, or a path to
greater intimacy and sex.
Prostate Problems
Stan just found out that a friend has prostate
cancer. Many men he knows have prostate
problems. He’s worried that this might happen
to him.
It’s true that prostate problems are
common after age 50. The good news
is there are many things you can do.

What Is the Prostate?
The prostate is a small gland in men
that helps make semen. Located just
below the bladder in front of the rectum,
it wraps around the tube that carries
urine and semen out of the body. It tends
to grow larger as you get older. If your
prostate gets too large, it can cause a
number of health issues.

Common Problems
Here are some examples of noncancer prostate problems:
Benign prostatic hyperplasia, or
BPH, is very common in older men.
It means your prostate is enlarged but not
cancerous. Treatments for BPH include:
■ Watchful waiting, also called active
surveillance. If your symptoms are not
too bad, your doctor may tell you to wait
to see if they get worse before starting
treatment. Your doctor will tell you how
often to return for checkups.
■ Medications. Medicines can help
shrink the prostate or relax muscles
near your prostate to ease symptoms.
■ Surgery. If nothing else has worked,
your doctor may suggest surgery to help
urine flow.
■ Other treatments. Sometimes radio
waves, microwaves, or lasers are used to
treat urinary problems caused by BPH.
These methods use different kinds of
heat to reduce extra prostate tissue.
Acute bacterial prostatitis usually
starts suddenly from a bacterial infection.
See your doctor right away if you have
fever, chills, or pain in addition to prostate
symptoms. Most cases can be cured with
antibiotics. You also may need medication
to help with pain or discomfort.
Chronic bacterial prostatitis is an
infection that comes back again and
again. This rare problem can be hard to
treat. Sometimes, taking antibiotics for
a long time may work. Talk with your
doctor about other things you can do to
help you feel better.
Chronic prostatitis, also called
chronic pelvic pain syndrome, is a
common prostate problem. It can cause
pain in the lower back, in the groin, or
at the tip of the penis. Treatment may
require a combination of medicines,
surgery, and lifestyle changes.
Be sure to talk with your doctor about
the possible side effects of treatment.

Symptoms of Prostate Problems
See your doctor right away if you have
any of these symptoms:
■ Frequent urge to urinate.
■ Need to get up many times during
the night to urinate.
■ Blood in urine or semen.
■ Pain or burning urination.
■ Painful ejaculation.
■ Frequent pain or stiffness in lower
back, hips, pelvic or rectal area, or
upper thighs.
■ Dribbling of urine.

Prostate Cancer.
Prostate cancer is common among
American men. Your chance of getting
prostate cancer may be affected by your:
■ Age. Men age 50 and older run a
greater risk.
■ Race. Prostate cancer is most common
among African American men, followed
by Hispanic and Native American men.
Asian American men have the lowest rates
of prostate cancer.
■ Family history. If your father or
brother had prostate cancer, you are
more likely to have it, too.
■ Diet. The risk of prostate cancer may
be higher for men who eat high fat diets.

Diagnosing Prostate Cancer
To find out if prostate symptoms
are caused by cancer, your doctor will
ask about your past medical problems
and your family’s medical history. Your
doctor also will perform a physical exam.
During the exam, your doctor will put
a gloved finger into your rectum to
examine your prostate to check for:
■ The size, firmness, and texture of
the prostate.
■ Any hard areas, lumps, or growth
spreading beyond the prostate.
■ Any pain caused by touching or
pressing on the prostate.
You may be asked to give a urine
sample for testing. Your doctor also
may do a blood test to check the
prostate specific antigen (PSA) level.
Prostate specific antigen levels can be high in men with
an enlarged prostate gland or with
prostate cancer. You may also need an
ultrasound exam that takes computer
pictures of the prostate.
If tests show that you might have
cancer, your doctor will refer you to a
specialist (a urologist) for a prostate
biopsy. The doctor will take small
tissue samples from several areas of the
prostate gland to look for cancer cells.

Treating Prostate Cancer.
Treatment for prostate cancer
depends on whether cancer is in
part or all of the prostate, or if it has
spread to other parts of the body. It
also depends on your age and overall
health. Talk with your doctor about the
best treatment choice for you and the
possible side effects of treatment. You
may want to ask another doctor for a
second opinion.

Treatment for prostate cancer may be:
■ Watchful waiting, also called active
surveillance. If the cancer is not causing
problems, you may decide not to get
treated right away. Instead, your doctor
will check regularly for changes in your
condition. Treatment will start if the
cancer begins to grow.
■ Surgery. The most common type
of surgery removes the whole prostate
and some nearby tissue.
■ Radiation therapy. This treatment
uses radiation to kill cancer cells and
shrink tumors. The radiation may
come from an x-ray machine or from
tiny radioactive pellets placed inside or
near the tumor.
■ Hormone therapy. Men having
other treatments, like radiation
therapy, also may be treated with
drugs to stop the body from making
testosterone. This is done if it seems
likely that the cancer will come back.
Hormone therapy also can be used for
prostate cancer that has spread beyond
the prostate.

Prostate specific antigen Testing
Until recently, many doctors encouraged yearly prostate specific antigen testing for all men beginning at age 50, or even earlier for men at high risk of prostate cancer. As doctors have learned
more about the benefits and harms of prostate cancer screening, they have begun to
caution against annual prostate specific antigen testing. Talk with your doctor about what is best for you.
Yearly prostate specific antigen testing in men without symptoms is generally not recommended. However, in
men who report prostate symptoms, prostate specific antigen testing (along with digital rectal examination)
can help doctors determine the nature of the problem. In men who have been treated for
prostate cancer, the prostate specific antigen test may be used to see if the cancer has come back.
Pain: You Can Get Help
Phyllis loves playing with her grandchildren,
working in the garden, and going to bingo
games. But, at age 76, the constant knee pain
from osteoarthritis is taking a toll. It keeps
her awake at night and stops her from doing
activities she enjoys. The pain’s getting to
be too much to handle, but she doesn’t know
what to do about it.

You’ve probably been in pain at one time
or another. Maybe you’ve had a headache
or bruise, pain that doesn’t last too long.
But, many older people have ongoing
pain from health problems like arthritis,
diabetes, shingles, or cancer.
Pain can be your body’s way of warning
you that something is wrong. Always tell
the doctor where you hurt and exactly how
it feels.

Acute Pain and Chronic Pain
There are two kinds of pain. Acute
pain begins suddenly, lasts for a short
time, and goes away as your body heals.

You might feel acute pain after surgery or
if you have a broken bone, infected tooth,
or kidney stone.
Pain that lasts for 3 months or longer is
called chronic pain. This pain often affects
older people. For some people, chronic
pain is caused by a health condition such as
arthritis. It may also follow acute pain from
an injury, surgery, or other health issue
that has been treated, like post herpetic
neuralgia after shingles.
Living with any type of pain can be
hard. It can cause many other problems.
For instance, pain can:
■ Get in the way of your daily activities.
■ Disturb your sleep and eating habits.
■ Make it difficult to continue working.
■ Be related to depression or anxiety.
■ Keep you from spending time with
friends and family.

Describing Pain.
Many people have a hard time describing
pain. Think about these questions when you
explain how the pain feels:
■ Where does it hurt?
■ When did the pain start? Does it come
and go?
■ What does it feel like? Is the pain
sharp, dull, or burning? Would you use
some other word to describe it?
■ Do you have other symptoms?
■ When do you feel the pain? In the
morning? In the evening? After eating?
■ Is there anything you do that makes
the pain feel better or worse? For example,
does using a heating pad or ice pack help?
Does changing your position from lying
down to sitting up make it better?
■ What medicines, including over the counter medications and non medicine
therapies have you tried, and what was
their effect?
Your doctor or nurse may ask you to
rate your pain on a scale of 0 to 10, with 0
being no pain and 10 being the worst pain
you can imagine. Or, your doctor may ask
if the pain is mild, moderate, or severe.
Some doctors or nurses have pictures of
faces that show different expressions of
pain and ask you to point to the face that
shows how you feel. Your doctor may ask
you to keep a diary of when and what
kind of pain you feel every day.

Attitudes About Pain.
Everyone reacts to pain differently.
Some people feel they should be brave and
not complain when they hurt. Other people
are quick to report pain and ask for help.
Worrying about pain is common. This
worry can make you afraid to stay active, and
it can separate you from your friends and
family. Working with your doctor, you can
find ways to continue to take part in physical
and social activities despite having pain.
Some people put off going to the doctor
because they think pain is part of aging
and nothing can help. This is not true!
It is important to see a doctor if you have
a new pain. Finding a way to manage pain
is often easier if it is addressed early.

Treating Pain
Treating, or managing, chronic pain
is important. Some treatments involve
medications, and some do not. Your
treatment plan should be specific to
your needs.
Most treatment plans focus on both
reducing pain and increasing ways to support
daily function while living with pain.
Talk with your doctor about how long it
may take before you feel better. Often, you
have to stick with a treatment plan before
you get relief. It’s important to stay on a
schedule. Sometimes this is called “staying
ahead” or “keeping on top” of your pain.
Be sure to tell your doctor about any side
effects. You might have to try different
treatments until you find a plan that works
for you. As your pain lessens, you can likely
become more active and will see your mood
lift and sleep improve.

Medicines to Treat Pain
Your doctor may prescribe one or
more of the following pain medications.
Talk with your doctor about their safety
and the right dose to take.
■ Acetaminophen may help all types
of pain, especially mild to moderate
pain. Acetaminophen is found in over the counter and prescription medicines.
People who have more than three drinks
per day or who have liver disease should
not take acetaminophen.
■ Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) include aspirin, naproxen, and
ibuprofen. Long term use of some NSAIDs
can cause side effects, like internal bleeding
or kidney problems, which make them
unsafe for many older adults. You may not
be able to take ibuprofen if you have high
blood pressure.
■ Narcotics (also called opioids) are used
for moderate to severe pain and require a
doctor’s prescription. They may be habit forming. They can also be dangerous
when taken with alcohol or certain other
drugs. Examples of narcotics are codeine,
morphine, and oxycodone.
■ Other medications are sometimes used
to treat pain. These include antidepressants,
anticonvulsive medicines, local painkillers
like nerve blocks or patches, and ointments
and creams.
As people age, they are at risk for
developing more side effects from
medications. It’s important to take exactly
the amount of pain medicine your doctor
prescribes. Don’t chew or crush your pills if
they are supposed to be swallowed whole.
Talk with your doctor or pharmacist if
you’re having trouble swallowing your pills.
Mixing any pain medication with
alcohol or other drugs can be dangerous.
Make sure your doctor knows all the
medicines you take, including over the counter drugs and dietary supplements, as
well as the amount of alcohol you drink.
Remember: If you think the medicine
is not working, don’t change it on your
own. Talk to your doctor or nurse.


Pain Specialist.
Some doctors receive extra training in pain
management. If you find that your regular
doctor can’t help you, ask him or her for
the name of a pain medicine specialist. A
pain specialist may be a doctor, nurse, or
anesthesiologist.
If you or a loved one is managing pain from
cancer or other serious illness, ask to be seen
by a palliative care specialist. These specialists
are trained to manage pain and other
symptoms for people with serious illnesses.


What Other Treatments Help
with Pain?
In addition to drugs, there are a
variety of complementary and alternative
approaches that may provide relief. Talk
to your doctor about these treatments.
It may take both medicine and other
treatments to feel better.
■ Acupuncture uses hair thin needles
to stimulate specific points on the body
to relieve pain.
■ Biofeedback helps you learn to control
your heart rate, blood pressure, muscle
tension, and other body functions. This
may help reduce your pain and stress level.
■ Cognitive behavioral therapy is a
form of short term counseling that may
help reduce your reaction to pain.
■ Distraction can help you cope with
acute pain, taking your mind off your
discomfort.
■ Electrical nerve stimulation uses
electrical impulses to relieve pain.
■ Guided imagery uses directed
thoughts to create mental pictures that
may help you relax, manage anxiety,
sleep better, and have less pain.
■ Hypnosis uses focused attention to
help manage pain.
■ Massage therapy can release tension
in tight muscles.
■ Mind body stress reduction combines
mindfulness meditation, body awareness,
and yoga to increase relaxation and
reduce pain.
■ Physical therapy uses a variety of
techniques to help manage everyday
activities with less pain and teaches you
ways to improve flexibility and strength.

Can I Get Addicted to Pain
Medicine?
Sometimes, strong medications called
opioids are needed to control pain. Opioid
pain relievers are generally safe when taken
for a short time as prescribed by your doctor,
but they can become addictive, especially
if they are misused. Regular use can lead to
dependence. Never take opioids in greater
amounts or more often than prescribed.
Using opioids can also increase risk for falls,
dizziness, and other ailments in older adults.
Becoming addicted to prescription pain
medicine can happen to anyone, including
older adults. Sometimes, these treatments
are the only ones available that can help.
But, sometimes other treatments can
and should be tried first or can be used
intermittently or simultaneously. So, ask
your doctor if there is another medicine or
a non-medicine alternative you can try. Tell
your doctor if you or a family member has a
history of alcohol or drug abuse.

Helping Yourself.
There are things you can do yourself
that might help you feel better. Try to:
■ Keep a healthy weight. Putting on extra
pounds can slow healing and make some
pain worse. A healthy weight might help
with pain in the knees, back, hips, or feet.
■ Be physically active. Pain might make
you inactive, which can lead to more pain
and loss of function. Activity can help.
■ Get enough sleep. It can reduce pain
sensitivity, help healing, and improve
your mood.
■ Avoid tobacco, caffeine, and alcohol.
They can get in the way of treatment and
increase pain.
■ Join a pain support group. Sometimes,
it can help to talk to other people about
how they deal with pain. You can share
your thoughts while learning from others.

Cancer Pain.
Some people with cancer are more
afraid of the pain than of the cancer.
But most pain from cancer or cancer
treatments can be controlled. As with all
pain, it’s best to start managing cancer
pain early. It might take a while to find
the best approach.
One special concern in managing
cancer pain is “breakthrough pain.” This
is pain that comes on quickly and can take
you by surprise. It can be very upsetting.
After one attack, many people worry it
will happen again. This is another reason
to talk with your doctor about having a
pain management plan in place.

Alzheimer’s Disease and Pain.
People who have Alzheimer’s disease
may not be able to tell you when they’re in
pain. When you’re caring for someone with
Alzheimer’s, watch for clues. A person’s
face may show signs of being in pain or
feeling ill. You may see a person frequently
changing position or having trouble
sleeping. You may also notice sudden
changes in behavior such as increased
agitation, crying, or moaning. Refusing
to eat may be a sign that the person has
tooth pain or other oral health issues.
It’s important to find out if there is
something wrong. If you’re not sure what
to do, call the doctor for help.

Pain at the End of Life.
Not everyone who is dying is in pain.
But, if a person has pain at the end of life,
there are ways to help. Experts believe
it’s best to focus on making the person
comfortable, without worrying about
possible addiction or drug dependence.

Some Facts About Pain.
■ Most people don’t have to live with
pain. There are pain treatments. While not
all pain can be cured, most pain can be
managed. If your doctor has not been able to
help you, ask to see a pain specialist.
■ The side effects from pain medicine
are often manageable. Side effects from
pain medicine like constipation, dry
mouth, and drowsiness may be a problem
when you first begin taking the medicine.
These problems can often be treated and
may go away as your body gets used to the
medicine.
■ Your doctor will not think you’re
a sissy if you talk about your pain. If
you’re in pain, tell your doctor so you
can get help.
■ If you use pain medicine now, it
will still work when you need it later.
Using medicine at the first sign of pain
may help control your pain later.
■ Pain is not “all in your head.” No
one but you knows how your pain feels.
If you’re in pain, talk with your doctor.
Menopause.
One cool fall day, Ellen and Sue were watching
their teenagers play soccer when all of a sudden
Ellen flushed and seemed to be sweating. Sue
asked if Ellen was okay. “Oh, it’s a hot flash,”
Ellen said. “This is happening to me several
times a week now even at night. At first, I
didn’t know what was going on, but my doctor
told me these are symptoms of menopause.”
Sue laughed and said, “Yes, I remember hot
flashes, but they’re over now.”
Menopause, or the “change of life,” is
different for each woman. For example,
hot flashes and sleep problems may trouble
your sister. Meanwhile, you are enjoying a
new sense of freedom and energy. And
your best friend might hardly be aware of
a change at all.

What Is Menopause?
Menopause is a normal part of life, just
like puberty. It is the time of your last
menstrual period. You may notice changes
in your body before and after menopause.

The transition usually has three parts:
perimenopause, menopause, and postmenopause.
Changes usually begin with perimenopause.
This can begin several years before your last
menstrual period. Changing levels of estrogen
and progesterone, which are two female
hormones made in your ovaries, might lead
to symptoms. Menopause comes next, the end
of your menstrual periods. After a full year
without a period, you can say you have been
“through menopause,” and perimenopause
is over. Post menopause follows perimenopause
and lasts the rest of your life.
The average age of a woman having her
last period, menopause, is 51. But, some
women have their last period in their forties,
and some have it later in their fifties.
Smoking can lead to early menopause.
So can some types of operations. For
example, surgery to remove your uterus
(called a hysterectomy) will make your
periods stop, and that’s menopause. But
you might not have menopause symptoms
like hot flashes right then because if your
ovaries are untouched, they still make
hormones. In time, when your ovaries start
to make less estrogen, menopause symptoms
could start. But, sometimes both ovaries
are removed (called an oophorectomy),
usually along with your uterus. In this case,
menopause symptoms can start right away,
no matter what age you are, because your
body has lost its main supply of estrogen.

What Are the Signs of
Menopause?
Women may have different signs or
symptoms at menopause. That’s because
estrogen is used by many parts of your
body. As you have less estrogen, you could
have various symptoms. Here are the most
common changes you might notice at
midlife. Some may be part of aging rather
than directly related to menopause.
Change in your period. This might be
what you notice first. Your periods may no
longer be regular. They may be shorter or
last longer. You might bleed less than usual
or more. These are all normal changes, but
to make sure there isn’t a problem, see your
doctor if:
■ Your periods come very close together.
■ You have heavy bleeding.
■ You have spotting.
■ Your periods last more than a week.
■ Your periods resume after no
bleeding for more than a year.
Hot flashes. Many women have hot
flashes, which can last a few years after
menopause. They may be related to
changing estrogen levels. A hot flash is a
sudden feeling of heat in the upper part
or all of your body. Your face and neck
become flushed. Red blotches may
appear on your chest, back, and arms.
Heavy sweating and cold shivering can
follow. Flashes can be very mild or strong
enough to wake you from your sleep
(called night sweats). Most hot flashes last
between 30 seconds and 10 minutes.
Vaginal health and bladder control. Your
vagina may get drier. This could make sexual
intercourse uncomfortable. Or, you could
have other health problems, such as vaginal or
bladder infections. Some women also find it
hard to hold their urine long enough to get to
the bathroom. This loss of bladder control is
called incontinence. You may have a sudden
urge to urinate, or urine may leak during
exercise, sneezing, or laughing.
Sleep. Around midlife, some women
start having trouble getting a good night’s
sleep. Maybe you can’t fall asleep easily, or
you wake too early. Night sweats might wake
you up. You might have trouble falling back
to sleep if you wake up during the night.
Sex. You may find that your feelings about
sex are changing. You could be less interested.
Or, you could feel freer and sexier after
menopause. After 1 full year without a period,
you can no longer become pregnant. But
remember, you could still be at risk for
sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), such
as gonorrhea or even HIV/AIDS. You
increase your risk for an STD if you are
having sex with more than one person or
with someone who is having sex with others.

If so, make sure your partner uses a condom
each time you have sex.
Mood changes. You might find yourself
more moody or irritable around the time
of menopause. Scientists don’t know why
this happens. It’s possible that stress, family
changes such as growing children or aging
parents, a history of depression, or feeling
tired could be causing these mood changes.
Your body seems different. Your waist
could get larger. You could lose muscle
and gain fat. Your skin could get thinner.
You might have memory problems, and
your joints and muscles could feel stiff and
achy. Are these a result of having less
estrogen or just related to growing older?
Experts don’t know the answer.

What About My Heart and Bones?
Two common health problems can start
to happen at menopause, and you might
not even notice.
Osteoporosis. Day in and day out, your
body is busy breaking down old bone and
replacing it with new healthy bone. Estrogen
helps control bone loss, and losing estrogen
around the time of menopause causes
women to lose more bone than is replaced.
In time, bones can become weak and break
easily. This condition is called osteoporosis.
Talk to your doctor to see if you should have
a bone density test to find out if you are at
risk. Your doctor can also suggest ways to
prevent or treat osteoporosis.
Heart disease. After menopause, women
are more likely to have heart disease.
Changes in estrogen levels may be part of
the cause. But, so is getting older. As you
age, you may gain weight and develop
other problems, like high blood pressure.
These could put you at greater risk for
heart disease. Be sure to have your blood
pressure and levels of triglycerides, fasting
blood glucose, and cholesterol, including
LDL and HDL, checked regularly. Talk to
your healthcare provider to find out what
you should do to protect your heart.

How Can I Stay Healthy After
Menopause?
Staying healthy after menopause may
mean making some changes in the way
you live.
■ Don’t smoke. If you do use any type of
tobacco, stop / it’s never too late to
benefit from quitting smoking.
■ Eat a healthy diet, low in fat, high in
fiber, with plenty of fruits, vegetables,
and whole grain foods, as well as all
the important vitamins and minerals.
■ Make sure you get enough calcium
and vitamin D in your diet or with
vitamin/mineral supplements if
recommended by your doctor.
■ Learn what your healthy weight is, and
try to stay there.
■ Do weight bearing exercise, such as
walking, jogging, or dancing, at least 3
days each week for healthy bones. But
try to be physically active in other ways
for your general health.
Other things to remember:
■ Take medicine if your doctor
prescribes it for you, especially if it is
for health problems you cannot see or
feel, for example, high blood
pressure, high cholesterol, or
osteoporosis.
■ Use a water based vaginal lubricant
(not petroleum jelly) or a vaginal
estrogen cream or tablet to help with
vaginal discomfort.
■ Get regular pelvic and breast exams,
Pap tests, and mammograms. You
should also be checked for colon and
rectal cancer and for skin cancer.
Contact your doctor right away if you
notice a lump in your breast or a mole
that has changed.

Menopause is not a disease that has to
be treated. But you might need help if
symptoms like hot flashes bother you. Here
are some ideas that have helped some
women:
■ Try to keep track of when hot flashes
happen, a diary can help. You might be
able to use this information to find out
what triggers your flashes and then avoid
those triggers.
■ When a hot flash starts, try to go
somewhere cool.
■ If night sweats wake you, sleep in a cool
room or with a fan on.
■ Dress in layers that you can take off if
you get too warm.
■ Use sheets and clothing that let your skin
“breathe.”
■ Have a cold drink (water or juice) when
a flash is starting.
You could also talk to your doctor about
whether there are any medicines to manage hot
flashes. A few drugs that are approved for other
uses (for example, certain antidepressants) seem
to be helpful to some women.

What About Those Lost
Hormones?
These days you hear a lot about whether or
not you should use hormones to help relieve
some menopause symptoms. It’s hard to know
what to do, although there is some
information to help you.
During perimenopause, some doctors
suggest birth control pills to help with very
heavy, frequent, or unpredictable menstrual
periods. These pills might also help with
symptoms like hot flashes, as well as
prevent pregnancy.
If you are bothered by symptoms like
hot flashes, night sweats, or vaginal dryness,
your doctor might suggest taking estrogen
(as well as progesterone, if you still have a
uterus). This is known as menopausal
hormone therapy (MHT). Some people still
call it hormone replacement therapy or
HRT. Taking these hormones will probably
help with menopause symptoms. It also
can prevent the bone loss that can happen
at menopause.
Menopausal hormone therapy has risks.
That is why the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration suggests that women who
want to try MHT to manage their hot
flashes or vaginal dryness use the lowest
dose that works for the shortest time it’s
needed.

Do Phytoestrogens Help?
Phytoestrogens are estrogen like
substances found in some cereals, vegetables,
legumes (including soy), and herbs. They
might work in the body like a weak form
of estrogen. Researchers are trying to
discover whether phytoestrogens relieve
some symptoms of menopause and if they
might also carry some risks. Be sure to tell
your doctor if you decide to try eating a lot
more foods that contain phytoestrogens or
to try using an herbal supplement. Any food
or over the counter product that you use for
its drug like effects could change how other
prescribed drugs work or cause an overdose.

How Do I Decide What to Do?
If you are having bothersome symptoms,
talk to your healthcare provider for help
deciding how to best manage menopause.
You can see a gynecologist, geriatrician,
general practitioner, or internist. Make sure
the doctor knows your medical history and
your family medical history. This includes
whether you are at risk for heart disease,
osteoporosis, and breast cancer.
It may be helpful to remember that
your decision is never final. You can and
should review it with your doctor during
your yearly checkup. Your needs may
change over time and so might what we
know about menopause.
Hyperthermia: Too Hot for Your Health
Suyin’s bus was late. Even though it was noon
on a very hot summer day, she decided to walk
from the grocery store to her home. At 72 
healthy and active, Suyin thought the heat
would be no match for her! Yet, after walking
just one block, she felt dizzy and weak.
Too much heat is not safe for anyone.
It is even riskier if you are older or have
health problems. It is important to get
relief from the heat quickly. If not, you
might begin to feel confused or faint.
Your heart could become stressed and
stop beating.
Being hot for too long can be a
problem. It can cause several illnesses,
all grouped under the name hyperthermia:
■ Heat syncope is a sudden dizziness that
can happen when you are active in hot
weather. If you take a heart medication
called a beta blocker or are not used to
hot weather, you are even more likely to
feel faint. Rest in a cool place, put your
legs up, and drink water to make the
dizzy feeling go away.
■ Heat cramps are the painful
tightening of muscles in your stomach,
arms, or legs. Cramps can result from
hard work or exercise. Though your
body temperature and pulse usually
stay normal during heat cramps, your
skin may feel moist and cool. Find a
way to cool your body down. Rest in
the shade or in a cool building. Drink
plenty of fluids, but not those with
alcohol or caffeine.
■ Heat edema is a swelling in your
ankles and feet when you get hot. Put
your legs up to help reduce swelling. If
that doesn’t work fairly quickly, check
with your doctor.
■ Heat exhaustion is a warning that
your body can no longer keep itself
cool. You might feel thirsty, dizzy,
weak, uncoordinated, and nauseated.
You may sweat a lot. Your body
temperature may stay normal, but
your skin may feel cold and clammy.
Some people with heat exhaustion
have a rapid pulse. Rest in a cool place
and get plenty of fluids. If you don’t
feel better soon, get medical care. Be
careful, heat exhaustion can progress
to heat stroke.

Heat Stroke: A Medical
Emergency
If you have heat stroke, you need to
get medical help right away. Older people
living in homes or apartments without
air conditioning or fans are at most risk.
People who become dehydrated or those
with chronic diseases or alcoholism are
also at most risk. Signs of heat stroke are:
■ Fainting (possibly the first sign) or
becoming unconscious.
■ A change in behavior, confusion,
agitation, staggering, being grouchy, or
acting strangely.
■ Body temperature over 104°F (40°C).
■ Dry, flushed skin and a strong, rapid
pulse or a slow, weak pulse.
■ Not sweating even if it is hot.

Who Is at Risk?
Each year, most people who die from
hyperthermia are over 50 years old.
Health problems that put you at greater
risk include:
■ Heart or blood vessel problems.
■ Poorly working sweat glands or
changes in your skin caused by normal
aging.
■ Heart, lung, or kidney disease, as
well as any illness that makes you feel
weak all over or results in a fever.
■ Conditions treated by drugs, such
as diuretics, sedatives, tranquilizers,
and some heart and high blood
pressure medicines; they may make it
harder for your body to cool itself.
■ Taking several prescription
drugs; ask your doctor if any of your
medications make you more likely to
become overheated.
■ Being very overweight or
underweight.
■ Drinking alcoholic beverages.

How Can I Lower My Risk?
Things you can do to lower your
risk of heat related illness:
■ Drink plenty of liquids, such as
water or fruit or vegetable juices. Stay
away from drinks containing alcohol
or caffeine. If your doctor has told
you to limit your liquids, ask what you
should do when it is very hot.
■ If you live in a home or apartment
without fans or air conditioning, try
to keep your house as cool as possible.
Limit your use of the oven. Keep your
shades, blinds, or curtains closed during
the hottest part of the day. Open your
windows at night.
■ If your house is hot, try to spend
time during mid-day some place that
has air conditioning, for example, go
to the shopping mall, movies, library,
senior center, or a friend’s house.
■ If you need help getting to a cool
place, ask a friend or relative. Some
religious groups, senior centers, and
Area Agencies on Aging provide this
service. If necessary, take a taxi or call
for senior transportation. Don’t stand
outside in the heat waiting for a bus.
■ Dress for the weather. Some people
find natural fabrics, such as cotton, to
be cooler than synthetic fibers.
■ Don’t try to exercise or do a lot of
activities outdoors when it’s hot.
■ Avoid crowded places when it’s hot
outside. Plan trips during non-rush hour times.

Listen to Weather Reports
If the temperature or humidity is going
up or an air pollution alert is in effect,
you are at increased risk for a heat related illness. Play it safe by checking
the weather report before going outside.

What Should I Remember?
Older people can have a tough time
dealing with heat and humidity. The
temperature inside or outside does not
have to reach 100°F (38°C) to put them
at risk for a heat related illness.
Headache, confusion, dizziness, or
nausea could be a sign of a heat related
illness. Go to the doctor or an emergency
room to find out if you need treatment.
To keep heat related illnesses from
becoming a dangerous heat stroke,
remember to:
■ Get out of the sun and into a cool
place, air-conditioning is best.
■ Drink fluids, but avoid alcohol and
caffeine. Water and fruit or vegetable
juices are good choices.
■ Shower, bathe, or sponge off with
cool water.
■ Lie down and rest in a cool place.
■ Visit your doctor or go to an
emergency room if you don’t cool
down quickly.

A Senior Watch.
During hot weather, think about making
daily visits to older relatives and neighbors.
Remind them to drink lots of water or
juice, as long as their doctor hasn’t
recommended otherwise because of a
pre-existing condition. If there is a heat
wave, offer to help them go someplace
cool, such as air-conditioned malls,
libraries, or senior centers.
High Blood Pressure.
You can have high blood pressure,
or hypertension, and still feel just fine.
That’s because high blood pressure
often does not cause signs of illness
that you can see or feel. But, high
blood pressure, sometimes called “the
silent killer,” is very common in older
people and a major health problem.
If high blood pressure isn’t controlled
with lifestyle changes and medicine, it
can lead to stroke, heart disease, eye
problems, kidney failure, and other
health problems. High blood pressure
can also cause shortness of breath
during light physical activity or exercise.

What Is Blood Pressure?
Blood pressure is the force of blood
pushing against the walls of arteries.
When the doctor measures your blood

pressure, the results are given in two
numbers. The first number, called
systolic blood pressure, is the pressure
caused by your heart contracting and
pushing out blood. The second number,
called diastolic blood pressure, is the
pressure when your heart relaxes and
fills with blood. Your blood pressure
reading is usually given as the systolic
blood pressure number over the diastolic
blood pressure number, such as 138/72.
Normal blood pressure for adults is
defined as a systolic pressure of less
than 120 and a diastolic pressure of less
than 80. This is stated as 120/80.

Do I Have High Blood
Pressure?
One reason to visit your doctor
regularly is to have your blood pressure
checked. Routine checks of your blood
pressure will help pick up an early rise in
blood pressure, even though you might
feel fine. If there’s an indication that
your blood pressure is high at two or
more checkups, the doctor may ask you
to check your blood pressure at home at
different times of the day. If the pressure
stays high, even when you are relaxed, the
doctor may suggest exercise, changes in
your diet, and, most likely, medications.

What Is Considered High
Blood Pressure for Older
Adults?
Updated guidelines from the American
Heart Association and the American
College of Cardiology changed the
definition of high blood pressure or
hypertension for most people. High blood
pressure is now generally defined as 130
or higher for the first number, or 80 or
higher for the second number (previously
it was 140/90). However, there are
important considerations for older adults
in deciding whether to start treatment
for high blood pressure, including other
health conditions and overall fitness.
If your blood pressure is above 130/80,
your doctor will evaluate your health
to determine what treatment is needed
to balance risks and benefits in your
particular situation.

What if Just the First Blood
Pressure Number Is High?
For older people, often the first
number (systolic) is 130 or higher, but the
second number (diastolic) is less than 80.
This problem is called isolated systolic
hypertension, which is due to age related
stiffening of the major arteries. It is
the most common form of high blood
pressure in older people and can lead
to serious health problems (stroke, heart
disease, eye problems, and kidney failure)
in addition to shortness of breath during
light physical activity, lightheadedness
upon standing too fast, and falls. Isolated
systolic hypertension is treated in the
same way as regular high blood pressure
(130 or higher for the first number, or
80 or higher for the second number)
but may require more than one type of
blood pressure medication. If your doctor
determines that your systolic pressure is
above a normal level for your age, ask
how you can lower it.

What if My Blood Pressure
Is Low?
If your blood pressure is lower than
90/60, you have low blood pressure, or
hypotension. You may feel lightheaded,
weak, dizzy, or even faint. Low blood
pressure can be caused by not drinking
enough liquids (dehydration), blood
loss, some medical conditions, or too
much medication.

Some High Blood Pressure
Risks You Can’t Change
Anyone can get high blood pressure.
But, some people have a greater chance
of having it because of things they can’t
change. These are:
■ Age. The chance of having high
blood pressure increases as you get older.
■ Gender. Before age 55, men have
a greater chance of having high blood
pressure. Women are more likely to have
high blood pressure after menopause.
■ Family history. High blood
pressure tends to run in some families.
■ Race. African Americans are at
increased risk for high blood pressure.

How Can I Control My Blood
Pressure?
High blood pressure is very common
in older people. As we age, our vascular
system changes. Arteries get stiffer, so
blood pressure goes up. This is true even
for people who have heart healthy habits.
The good news is that blood pressure can
be controlled in most people.

There are many lifestyle changes
you can make to lower your risk of high
blood pressure:
■ Keep a healthy weight. Being
overweight adds to your risk of high
blood pressure. Ask your doctor if you
need to lose weight.
■ Exercise every day. Moderate
exercise can lower your risk of high
blood pressure. Set some goals so you
can exercise safely and work your way up
to exercising at least 30 minutes a day
most days of the week. Check with your
doctor before starting an exercise plan
if you have any health problems that are
not being treated. 

■ Eat a healthy diet. A diet rich in
fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and
low fat dairy products may help to lower
blood pressure.
■ Cut down on salt. As you get older,
the body and blood pressure become
more sensitive to salt (sodium), so you
may need to watch how much salt is in
your diet. Most of the salt comes from
processed foods (for example, soup and
baked goods). A low salt diet, such as
the DASH diet, might help lower your
blood pressure. Talk with your doctor
about eating less salt.
■ Drink less alcohol. Drinking
alcohol can affect your blood pressure.
Men should not have more than two
drinks a day, and women no more
than one a day, to lower their risk of
high blood pressure.
■ Don’t smoke. Smoking increases
your risk for high blood pressure,
heart disease, stroke, and other health
problems. If you smoke, quit. You are
never too old to quit, and the health
benefits of quitting can be seen at
any age.
■ Get a good night’s sleep. Tell your
doctor if you’ve been told you snore
or sound like you stop breathing for
moments when you sleep. This may be
a sign of a problem called sleep apnea.
Treating sleep apnea and getting a
good night’s sleep can help to lower
blood pressure.
■Manage stress. Relaxing and
coping with problems can help lower
high blood pressure.

If these lifestyle changes don’t lower
your blood pressure to a safe level, your
doctor will also prescribe medicine. You
may try several kinds or combinations
of medicines before finding a plan
that works best for you. Medicine can
control your blood pressure, but it
can’t cure it. You will likely need to take
medicine for the rest of your life. Plan
with your doctor how to manage your
blood pressure.

High Blood Pressure Facts
High blood pressure is serious because
it can lead to major health problems.
Make a point of learning what your blood
pressure should be. And, remember:
■ High blood pressure may not make
you feel sick, but it is serious. See a
doctor to treat it.
■ You can lower your blood pressure
by changing your day to day habits and
by taking medicine, if needed.
■ If you take high blood pressure
medicine, making some lifestyle changes
may help lower the dose you need.
■ If you take blood pressure medicine
and your blood pressure goes down, it
means medicine and lifestyle changes
are working. If another doctor asks if you
have high blood pressure, the answer is,
“Yes, but it is being treated.”
■ Tell your doctor about all the drugs
you take. Don’t forget to mention
over the counter drugs, vitamins, and
dietary supplements. They may affect
your blood pressure. They also can
change how well your blood pressure
medicine works.
■ Blood pressure pills should be taken
at the same time each day. For example,
take your medicine in the morning
with breakfast or in the evening after
brushing your teeth. If you miss a dose,
do not double the dose the next day.
■ Don’t take more of your blood
pressure medicine than your doctor
prescribes. Do not stop taking your
medicine unless your doctor tells you to
stop. Don’t skip a day or take half a pill.
Remember to refill your medicine before
you run out of pills. If you cannot afford
your medicines, talk with your doctor or
pharmacist.
■ Before having surgery, ask your
doctor if you should take your blood
pressure medicine on that day.
■ Get up slowly from a seated or
lying position and stand for a bit before
walking. This lets your blood pressure
adjust before walking to prevent
dizziness, fainting, or a fall.
■ As you get older, high blood pressure,
especially isolated systolic hypertension, is
more common and can increase your risk
of serious health problems. Treatment,
especially if you have other medical
conditions, requires ongoing evaluation
and discussions with your doctor to strike
the best balance of reducing risks and
maintaining a good quality of life.

If your doctor asks you to take your
blood pressure at home, keep in mind:
■ There are many home blood pressure
monitors for sale. Ask your doctor, nurse,
or pharmacist which monitor you need
and how to use it. Have your monitor
checked at the doctor’s office to make
sure it works correctly.
■ Avoid smoking, exercise, and
caffeine 30 minutes before checking
your blood pressure.
■ Make sure you are sitting with your
feet uncrossed and on the floor, and that
your back is resting against something.
■ Relax quietly for 5 minutes before
checking your blood pressure.
■ Keep a list of your blood pressure
numbers, what time you measured your
blood pressure, and when you took your
blood pressure medication (if you take
it). Share this information with your
doctor, physician’s assistant, or nurse.
Healthy Eating After 50
Choosing healthy foods is a smart thing
to do, no matter your age! Healthy habits
like eating well and being physically active
can help you reduce your risk of chronic
diseases such as heart disease, diabetes,
and osteoporosis.
Here are some tips to get you started:
■ Eat many different colors and types of
vegetables and fruits.
■ Make sure at least half your grains are
whole grains.
■ Limit saturated fat (found mostly in
butter, beef fat, and coconut, palm, and
palm kernel oils) and trans fats (found in
processed foods like store bought baked
goods, pizza, and margarine).
■ Eat “good” (poly and monounsaturated)
fats, like those found in seeds, nuts, avocados,
and fatty fish like salmon. Any fats added in
cooking should come from plant based oils
like olive or canola oils.
■ Eat 8 ounces of seafood per week.
Certain fish, like salmon, shad, and trout,
contain less mercury than large fish, like
tuna. Mercury can be harmful.

Make Smart Food Choices
Eating a variety of foods from each food
group will help you get the nutrients you
need. The 2015 to 2020 Dietary Guidelines for
Americans from the U.S. Department of
Agriculture and Department of Health and
Human Services describes healthy eating
patterns. These guidelines are flexible to
help you choose a diet of nutritious foods
and drinks that you like, that are available
in your area, and that fit your budget.
The Dietary Guidelines suggests that
people 50 or older choose foods every
day from the following:
Vegetables: 2 to 3 cups
What is the same as a cup of cut up
vegetables? Two cups of uncooked leafy
vegetables.
Fruits: 1½ to 2 cups
What is the same as a half cup of cutup fruit? A fresh 2-inch peach or a half
cup of grapes.
Grains: 5 to 8 ounces
What is the same as an ounce of grains?
A small bagel; a slice of whole grain bread;
a cup of flaked, ready to eat cereal; or a half
cup of cooked rice or pasta.
Protein foods: 5 to 6½ ounces
What is the same as an ounce of meat,
fish, or poultry? One egg, ¼ cup of cooked
beans or tofu, a half ounce of nuts or seeds,
or 1 tablespoon of peanut butter.
Dairy: 3 cups of fat free or low fat milk
What is the same as 1 cup of milk? One
cup of plain yogurt, 1½ ounces of hard
cheese, or 2 cups of cottage cheese.
Oils: 5 to 7 teaspoons
What is the same as oil added during
cooking? Foods like olives, nuts, and
avocados have a lot of oil in them.
Other: 130 to 350 calories
This includes calories from all types
of foods and beverages, including baked
goods, sweets, and alcohol. If you eat
too many foods high in saturated fats or
added sugars, you will not have enough
calories left for the more nutritious foods
you should be eating.
Your doctor may want you to follow
a special diet because you have a health
problem like heart disease or diabetes. Or,
you might have been told to avoid eating
some foods because they can change how
well your medicines work. Talk with your
doctor or a registered dietitian, a nutrition
specialist, about foods you can eat instead.
Here’s a tip: Stay away from “empty
calories.” These are foods and drinks with
a lot of calories but not many nutrients, 
for example, chips, cookies, soda, and
alcohol.

If you have high blood pressure or are
at risk, your doctor may recommend the
DASH Eating Plan. DASH stands for Dietary
Approaches to Stop Hypertension. Following
this plan can help you lower your blood
pressure. See the For More Information About
Healthy Eating section to find out more about
DASH.

How Much Should I Eat?
How much you should eat depends
on how active you are. If you eat more
calories than your body uses, you gain
weight.
What are calories? Calories are a way
to count how much energy is in food. The
energy you get from food helps you do
the things you need to do each day. Try to
choose foods that have a lot of the nutrients
you need, but not many calories.
Just counting calories is not enough for
making smart choices. Think about this:
a medium banana, 1 cup of flaked cereal,
1½ cups of cooked spinach, 1 tablespoon
of peanut butter, or 1 cup of 1% milk all
have roughly the same number of calories.
But, the foods are different in many ways.
Some have more nutrients than others do.
For example, milk gives you more calcium
than a banana, and peanut butter gives
you more protein than cereal. Some foods
can make you feel more full than others.

How Many Calories Do
People Over Age 50 Need
Each Day?
A woman:
■ Who is not physically active needs
about 1,600 calories.
■ Who is somewhat active needs about
1,800 calories.
■ Who has an active lifestyle needs
about 2,000 to 2,200 calories.
A man:
■ Who is not physically active needs
about 2,000 to 2,200 calories.
■ Who is somewhat active needs about
2,200 to 2,400 calories.
■ Who has an active lifestyle needs
about 2,400 to 2,800 calories.
Here’s a tip: Aim for at least 150 minutes
(2½ hours) of physical activity each week.
Try to be active throughout the day to
reach this goal, and avoid sitting for a
long time.

Common Problems Older Adults Have with Eating.
Does your favorite chicken dish taste
different? As you age, your sense of taste
and smell may change, and foods may
seem to lose flavor. Try extra spices,
herbs, or lemon juice to add flavor. Also,
medicines may change how food tastes.
They can also make you feel less hungry.

Talk to your doctor if this is a problem.
Maybe some of the foods you used to
eat no longer agree with you. For example,
some people become lactose intolerant.
They have stomach pain, gas, or diarrhea
after eating or drinking something with
milk in it. Your doctor can test to see if you
are lactose intolerant.
Are you finding it harder to chew your
food? If you have dentures, maybe they
do not fit, or your gums are sore. If so,
a dentist can help you. Until then, you
might want to eat softer foods that are
easier to chew.
These are just a few possible problems
older adults may have with eating. 

Do Older Adults Need to
Drink Water?
With age, you might lose some of
your sense of thirst. Don’t wait until you
feel thirsty to drink water or other fluids.
Unless your doctor has told you to limit
fluids, drink plenty of liquids like water,
milk, or broth.
Try to add liquids throughout the day.
You could try low fat soup for a snack or
drink a glass of water when you take a pill.
Don’t forget to take sips of water, milk, or
juice between bites during a meal.

Snacking.
Snacks are okay, as long as they are smart
food choices. If you want an afternoon pick me up or 
after dinner snack, have a piece
of fruit, or spread peanut butter or low fat
cream cheese on whole wheat toast. Don’t
forget to include snacks in your daily food
count. For example, 1 tablespoon of peanut
butter spread on a slice of whole wheat
toast counts toward the protein foods
group and the grains group. Some ideas
for healthy snacking include:
■ Have an ounce of cheese with some
whole grain crackers, a container of
low fat or fat free yogurt, or a 1-ounce
portion of unsalted nuts.
■ Put fruit instead of candy in the bowl
on your coffee table.
■ Keep a container of washed, raw
vegetables in the fridge along with
hummus or other healthy dips.
■ To limit your portion sizes, don’t eat
from the bag. Count out a serving and
put the bag away.
■ When you are out and need a snack,
don’t be tempted by a candy bar. Instead,
take along homemade trail mix in a
plastic bag when you go out. If you need
to buy a snack while you are on the
go, pick up an apple or banana, most
convenience stores carry them.

What About Fiber?
Fiber is found in foods from plants,
fruits, vegetables, beans, nuts, seeds, and
whole grains. Eating more fiber can help
prevent stomach or intestinal problems,
like constipation. It might also help lower
cholesterol and blood sugar.
It is better to get fiber from food than
dietary supplements. Start adding fiber
slowly. That will help avoid gas. Here are
some tips for adding fiber:
■ Eat cooked dry beans, peas, and lentils.
■ Leave the skin on your fruit and
vegetables if possible but wash them first.
■ Choose whole fruit over fruit juice.
■ Eat whole grain breads and cereals.

Should I Cut Back on Salt?
The usual way people get sodium is by
eating salt. The body needs sodium, but
too much can make blood pressure go up
in some people. Many foods contain some
sodium, especially those high in protein.
However, most fresh fruits and vegetables
do not have much sodium. Salt is added to
many canned, boxed, and prepared foods.
People tend to eat more salt than they
need. If you are 51 or older, about
1 teaspoon of table salt, 2,300 milligrams
(mg) sodium is all you need each day.
That includes all the sodium in your
food and drink, not just the salt you
add. If you have high blood pressure or
prehypertension, try to limit sodium to
1,500 mg, or about 2∕3 teaspoon, per day.
Try to avoid adding salt during cooking
or at the table. Eat fewer salty snacks and
processed foods, such as lunch meats, potato
chips, or frozen dinners.
Look for the word sodium, not salt, on
the Nutrition Facts panel. Choose foods
labeled “low sodium,” “no salt added,”
“unsalted,” or “salt free.” The amount of
sodium in the same kind of food can vary
greatly among brands, so check the label.
Here’s a tip: Spices, herbs, and lemon
juice add flavor to your food, so you won’t
miss the salt.

What About Fat?
Fat in your diet comes from two places, 
the fat already in food and the fat added
when you cook. Fat gives you energy and
helps your body function, but it is high in
calories. Some types of fat, like mono and
polyunsaturated fats, provide your body with
important nutrients and can be good for you
in the right amounts. Other types of fat, like
trans fat and saturated fat, can be bad for
your health. To lower the fat in your diet:
■ Choose cuts of meat, fish, or poultry
(with the skin removed) with less fat. Trim
off any extra fat before cooking.
■ Use low fat or fat free dairy products
and salad dressings.
■ Choose unsaturated fats, such as olive,
canola, or vegetable oil, for cooking. Check
the label.
■ Don’t fry foods. Instead, broil, roast,
bake, stir-fry, steam, microwave, or boil
them.

Keep Food Safe.
As you grow older, you must take extra
care to keep your food safe to eat. It is
harder for you to fight off infections, and
some foods could make you very sick.
Handle raw meat, poultry, seafood, and
eggs with care. Keep them apart from foods
that won’t be cooked or are already cooked.
Use hot, soapy water to wash your hands,
tools, and work surfaces as you cook.
Don’t depend on sniffing or tasting
food to tell what is bad. Try putting dates
on the foods in your fridge. Check the “use
by” date on foods. If in doubt, toss it out.
Make sure food gets into the refrigerator
no more than 2 hours after it is bought or
cooked. Use or freeze leftovers within 3 to
4 days.

Can I Afford to Eat Right?
If your budget is limited, it might
take some planning to be able to pay for
the foods you should eat. Here are some
suggestions:
■ Buy only the foods you need, a
shopping list will help.
■ Buy only as much food as you will use.
If you buy in bulk, buy only as much as
you can use before it goes bad.
■ Choose foods with plain (generic)
labels or store brands, they often cost less
than name brands.
■ Plan your meals around food that is
on sale.
■ Divide leftovers into small servings,
label and date, and freeze to use within a
few months.
Getting Your Affairs in Order.
Ben has been married for 47 years. He always
managed the family’s money. But since his stroke,
Ben is not able to walk or talk. His wife, Shirley,
feels overwhelmed. Of course, she’s worried about
Ben’s health. But, on top of that, she has no idea
what bills should be paid or when they are due.
Across town, 80 years old Louise lives alone. One
night, she fell in the kitchen and broke her hip. She
spent a week in the hospital and 2 months in a
rehabilitation nursing home. Even though her son
lives across the country, he was able to pay her bills
and handle her Medicare questions right away.
That’s because, several years ago, Louise and her
son made a plan about what he should do in case
Louise had a medical emergency.

Plan for the Future.
No one ever plans to be sick or disabled.
Yet, it’s this kind of planning that can make
all the difference in an emergency.
Long before she fell, Louise put all her
important papers in one place and told her
son where to find them. She gave him the
name of her lawyer, as well as a list of people
he could contact at her bank, doctor’s
office, insurance company, and investment
firm. She made sure he had copies of her
Medicare and other health insurance cards.
She added her son’s name to her checking
account and safe deposit box at the bank.
Louise made sure Medicare and her doctor
had written permission to talk with her son
about her health and insurance claims.
On the other hand, Ben always took
care of family money matters, and he never
talked about the details with Shirley. No
one but Ben knew that his life insurance
policy was in a box in the closet or that the
car title and deed to the house were filed
in his desk drawer. Ben never expected that
his wife would have to take over. His lack
of planning has made a tough job even
tougher for Shirley.

What Exactly Is an “Important Paper”?
The answer to this question may be
different for every family. Remember, this
is a starting place. You may have other
information to add. For example, if you
have a pet, you will want to include the
name and address of your veterinarian.
Include complete information about:

Personal Records
■ Full legal name.
■ Social Security number.
■ Legal residence.
■ Date and place of birth.
■ Names and addresses of spouse
and children.
■ Location of birth and death certificates
and certificates of marriage, divorce,
citizenship, and adoption.
■ Employers and dates of employment.
■ Education and military records.
■ Names and phone numbers of
religious contacts.
■ Memberships in groups and awards
received.
■ Names and phone numbers of close
friends, relatives, doctors, lawyers, and
financial advisors.
■ Medications taken regularly (be sure
to update this regularly).
■ Location of living will and other
legal documents.

Steps for Getting Your Affairs in Order.
■ Put your important papers and copies of legal documents in one place. You can set up
a file, put everything in a desk or dresser drawer, or list the information and location
of papers in a notebook. If your papers are in a bank safe deposit box, keep copies in
a file at home. Check each year to see if there’s anything new to add.
■ Tell a trusted family member or friend where you put all your important papers.
You don’t need to tell this friend or family member about your personal affairs, but
someone should know where you keep your papers in case of an emergency. If you
don’t have a relative or friend you trust, ask a lawyer to help.
■ Discuss your end of life preferences with your doctor. He or she can explain what
health decisions you may have to make in the future and what treatment options
are available. Talking with your doctor can help ensure your wishes are honored,
and the visit may be covered by insurance.
■ Give permission in advance for your doctor or lawyer to talk with your caregiver as needed.
There may be questions about your care, a bill, or a health insurance claim. Without
your consent, your caregiver may not be able to get needed information. You can give
your okay in advance to Medicare, a credit card company, your bank, or your doctor.
You may need to sign and return a form.


Financial Records.
■ Sources of income and assets (pension
from your employer, IRAs, 401(k)s,
interest, etc.)
■ Social Security and Medicare/Medicaid
information.
■ Insurance information (life, health, long term care, home, car) with policy numbers
and agents’ names and phone numbers.
■ Names of your banks and account
numbers (checking, savings, credit union).
■ Investment income (stocks, bonds,
property) and stockbrokers’ names and
phone numbers.
■ Copy of most recent income tax return.
■ Location of most up to date will with
an original signature.
■ Liabilities, including property tax, 
what is owed, to whom, and when payments
are due.
■ Mortgages and debts, how and when
they are paid.
■ Location of original deed of trust
for home.
■ Car title and registration.
■ Credit and debit card names and
numbers.
■ Location of safe deposit box and key.


Legal Documents.
There are many different types of legal
documents that can help you plan how your
affairs will be handled in the future. Many
of these documents have names that sound
alike, so make sure you are getting the
documents you want. Also, State laws vary, so
find out about the rules, requirements, and
forms used in your State.
Wills and trusts let you name the person
you want your money and property to go to
after you die.
Advance directives let you make
arrangements for your care if you become
sick. Two common types of advance
directives are:
■ A living will gives you a say in your health
care if you become too sick to make your
wishes known. In a living will, you can state
what kind of care you do or don’t want. This
can make it easier for family members to
make tough healthcare decisions for you.
■ A durable power of attorney for health
care lets you name the person you want
to make medical decisions for you if you
can’t make them yourself. Make sure the
person you name is willing to make those
decisions for you.
For legal matters, there are ways to
give someone you trust the power to act in
your place.
■ A general power of attorney lets you give
someone else the authority to act on your
behalf, but this power will end if you are
unable to make your own decisions.
■ A durable power of attorney allows you to
name someone to act on your behalf for any
legal task, but it stays in place if you become
unable to make your own decisions.

Help for Getting Your Papers
in Order.
You may want to talk with a lawyer
about setting up a general power of
attorney, durable power of attorney, joint
account, trust, or advance directive. Be
sure to ask about the lawyer’s fees before
you make an appointment.
You should be able to find a directory of
local lawyers on the internet or at your local
library, or you can contact your local bar
association for lawyers in your area. Your local
bar association can also help you find what
free legal aid options your State has to offer.
An informed family member may be able to
help you manage some of these issues.
Forgetfulness: Knowing When to
Ask for Help.
Maria has been a teacher for 35 years. Recently
she has begun to forget details and has become
more and more disorganized. At first, she
laughed it off, but her memory problems have
worsened. Her family and friends have been
sympathetic but are not sure what to do. Parents
and colleagues are worried about Maria’s
performance in the classroom. The principal
suggested she see a doctor. Maria wonders if these
problems are signs of Alzheimer’s disease or just
forgetfulness that comes with getting older.
Many people worry about becoming
forgetful. They think forgetfulness is the
first sign of Alzheimer’s disease. Scientists
have learned a lot about memory and
why some kinds of memory problems are
serious but others are not.

Age Related Memory Changes.
Forgetfulness can be a normal part of
aging. As people get older, changes occur
in all parts of the body, including the brain.
As a result, some people may notice that it
takes longer to learn new things, they don’t
remember information as well as they did,
or they lose things like their glasses. These
usually are signs of mild forgetfulness, not
serious memory problems.
Some older adults also find that they
don’t do as well as younger people on
complex memory or learning tests. Scientists
have found, though, that given enough
time, healthy older people can do as well as
younger people do on these tests. In fact, as
they age, healthy adults usually improve in
areas of mental ability such as vocabulary.

Other Causes of Memory Loss.
Some memory problems are related
to health issues that may be treatable. For
example, medication side effects; vitamin
B12 deficiency; chronic alcoholism; and
tumors, infections, or blood clots in the
brain can cause memory loss or possibly
dementia. Some thyroid, kidney, or liver
disorders also can lead to memory loss.
A doctor should treat serious medical
conditions like these as soon as possible.
Emotional problems, such as stress,
anxiety, or depression, can make a person
more forgetful and can be mistaken for
dementia. For instance, someone who has
recently retired or who is coping with the
death of a spouse, relative, or friend may
feel sad, lonely, worried, or bored. Trying
to deal with these life changes leaves some
people confused or forgetful.
The confusion and forgetfulness
caused by emotions usually are temporary
and go away when the feelings fade. But if
these feelings last for more than 2 weeks,
it is important to get help from a doctor
or counselor. Treatment may include
counseling, medication, or both.

More Serious Memory Problems.
For some older people, memory
problems are a sign of mild cognitive
impairment, Alzheimer’s disease, or a related
dementia. People who are worried about
memory problems should see a doctor. The
doctor might conduct or order a thorough
physical and mental health evaluation to
reach a diagnosis. Often, these evaluations
are conducted by a neurologist, a physician
who specializes in problems related to the
brain and central nervous system.
A complete medical exam for memory
loss should review the person’s medical
history, including the use of prescription and
over the counter medicines; family history of
dementia; a physical exam; and neurological
tests to assess memory, balance, language,
and other cognitive functions. A correct
diagnosis depends on accurate details, so
in addition to talking with the patient, the
doctor might ask a family member, caregiver,
or close friend for information.
Blood and urine tests can help the
doctor find or rule out possible causes of
the memory problems. A brain scan also
may help identify or rule out some causes of
the memory problems.
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI).
Some people with memory problems have
a condition called amnestic mild cognitive
impairment, or amnestic MCI. People with
this condition have more memory problems
than normal for people their age, but their
symptoms are not as severe as those of
people with Alzheimer’s disease, and they
are able to carry out their normal daily
activities.
Signs of MCI include losing things
often, forgetting to go to important events
or appointments, and having more trouble
coming up with words than other people
of the same age. Family and friends may
notice memory lapses, and the person with
MCI may worry about losing his or her
memory. These worries may prompt the
person to see a doctor for diagnosis.
Researchers have found that more
people with MCI than those without it go
on to develop Alzheimer’s. However, not
everyone who has MCI develops Alzheimer’s.
There is no standard treatment for MCI.
Typically, the doctor will monitor and test
a person with MCI every 6 to 12 months to
detect any changes in memory and other
thinking skills over time. No medications
have been approved to treat MCI.
Dementia. Dementia is the loss of
thinking, memory, and reasoning skills and
behavioral abilities to such an extent that
it interferes with a person’s daily life and
activities. Dementia is not a disease itself
but a group of symptoms caused by certain
diseases or conditions such as Alzheimer’s.
Symptoms of dementia may include:

■ Being unable to remember things.
■ Asking the same question or repeating
the same story over and over.
■ Becoming lost in familiar places.
■ Having trouble following directions.
■ Getting confused about time, people,
and places.
■ Having trouble handling money and
paying bills.
■ Experiencing increased anxiety and/
or aggression.
Two of the most common forms of
dementia in older people are Alzheimer’s
disease and vascular dementia. These types
of dementia cannot be cured at present.
In Alzheimer’s disease, changes in certain
parts of the brain result in the death of
many nerve cells. Symptoms of Alzheimer’s
begin slowly and worsen steadily as damage
to nerve cells spreads throughout the
brain. As time goes by, forgetfulness gives
way to serious problems with memory,
judgment, recognizing family and friends,
and the ability to perform daily activities.
Eventually, the person needs total care.
In vascular dementia, injuries to the
vessels supplying blood to the brain lead
to the death of brain tissue, often after a
stroke or series of strokes. Symptoms of
vascular dementia can vary but usually
begin suddenly, depending on the location
and severity of a stroke. The person’s
memory, language, reasoning, and
coordination may be affected. Mood and
personality changes are common as well.
Some people have both Alzheimer’s
and vascular dementia, a condition known
as mixed dementia.


Tips for Dealing with
Forgetfulness.
People with some forgetfulness can use a
variety of techniques that may help them
stay healthy and deal with changes in
their thinking.
■ Plan tasks, make “to do” lists, and use
memory aids like notes and calendars.
Some people find they remember things
better if they mentally connect them to a
familiar name, song, book, or TV show.
■ Keep up interests or hobbies, and
develop new ones, such as volunteering
and visiting with family and friends.
■ Engage in physical activity and
exercise. Several studies have associated
aerobic exercise (such as brisk walking)
with better brain function, although
more research is needed to say for sure
whether exercise can help prevent or delay
dementia. Exercise can also help relieve
feelings of stress, anxiety, or depression.
■ Eat healthy foods. A healthy diet
can help reduce the risk of many chronic
diseases and may also help keep your
brain healthy.
■ Limit alcohol use. Although some
studies suggest that moderate alcohol
use has health benefits, heavy or binge
drinking over time can cause memory loss
and permanent brain damage.

Treatment for Dementia.
A person with dementia should be
under a doctor’s care. The doctor might
be a neurologist, family doctor, internist,
geriatrician, or psychiatrist. He or she
can help treat the patient’s physical and
behavioral problems (such as agitation or
wandering) and answer the many questions
that the person or family may have.
People with dementia caused by
Alzheimer’s disease may be treated with
medications. Several medications are
approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration to treat Alzheimer’s.
These drugs may, for some people, help
slow down certain problems, such as
memory loss, allowing them to remain
independent for longer. They may also
help with certain behavioral problems.
However, none of these drugs can stop
Alzheimer’s disease from progressing.
Many studies are investigating medications
and other interventions to prevent or delay
Alzheimer’s disease and cognitive decline.
People with vascular dementia should
take steps to prevent further strokes.
These steps include controlling high blood
pressure, monitoring and treating high
cholesterol and diabetes, and not smoking.
Family members and friends can help
people in the early stages of dementia
continue their daily routines, physical
activities, and social contacts. People with
dementia should be kept up to date about
the details of their lives, the time of day,
where they live, and what is happening at
home or in the world. Memory aids such
as a big calendar, a list of daily plans, and
notes may help.

What You Can Do.
If you’re concerned that you or someone
you know has a serious memory problem,
talk with your doctor. He or she may be able
to diagnose the problem or refer you to a
specialist, such as a neurologist or geriatric
psychiatrist. Healthcare professionals
who specialize in Alzheimer’s and other
dementias can recommend ways to manage
the problem and suggest treatment and
services that might help.
Consider participating in clinical
trials or studies. People with and without
memory problems may be able to take
part in clinical trials, which may help
themselves or future generations.
Elder Abuse.
Gerald, 73, had a stroke, which left him
unable to care for himself. His son offered to
help, and Gerald moved in with him and his
family. But, Gerald’s son and daughter in-law
worked all day and were busy with their kids in
the evenings. Gerald hated being a burden on
them and tried to take care of himself.
One day, Gerald’s friend Carmen came to visit.
She was surprised to see food stains on his
clothes and sores on his heels. His room smelled
like urine, too. Gerald seemed depressed and
withdrawn, not at all like the jolly, witty
friend she’d known for years. Carmen worried
that Gerald’s family was neglecting him.
Abuse can happen to anyone, no matter
the person’s age, sex, race, religion, or
ethnic or cultural background. Many
older people are victims of elder abuse,
sometimes called elder mistreatment.
Abuse can happen in many places,
including the older person’s home, a
family member’s house, an assisted living
facility, or a nursing home.

Types of Abuse.
There are many types of abuse:
■ Physical abuse happens when
someone causes bodily harm by hitting,
pushing, or slapping.
■ Emotional abuse, sometimes called
psychological abuse, can include a
caregiver saying hurtful words, yelling,
threatening, or repeatedly ignoring
the older person. Keeping that person
from seeing close friends and relatives is
another form of emotional abuse.
■ Neglect occurs when the caregiver
does not try to respond to the older
person’s needs.
■ Abandonment is leaving a senior alone
without planning for his or her care.
■ Sexual abuse involves a caregiver
forcing an older adult to watch or be
part of sexual acts.

Money Matters
After his mother died, Victor started looking after
his 80 year old grandfather, Jasper. Because of his
failing eyesight, Jasper could no longer drive to
the bank. So, Jasper permitted Victor to withdraw
money from the bank every month to pay bills.
Lately, it seems the bank balance is lower than
it should be. Jasper wonders if Victor is keeping
some cash for himself.
Financial abuse happens when
money or belongings are stolen. It can
include forging checks, taking someone
else’s retirement and Social Security
benefits, or using another person’s credit
cards and bank accounts. It also includes
changing names on a will, bank account,
life insurance policy, or title to a house
without permission from the older person.
Financial abuse is becoming a widespread
and hard to detect issue. Even someone
you’ve never met can steal your financial
information using the telephone or email.
Be careful about sharing any financial
information over the phone or online,
you don’t know who will use it.
Healthcare fraud can be committed by
doctors, hospital staff, and other healthcare
workers. It includes overcharging, billing
twice for the same service, falsifying
Medicaid or Medicare claims, or charging
for care that wasn’t provided. Older adults
and caregivers should keep an eye out for
this type of fraud.

Who Is Being Abused?
Most victims of abuse are women, but
some are men. Likely targets are older
people who have no family or friends
nearby and people with disabilities,
memory problems, or dementia.
Abuse can happen to any older person,
but often affects those who depend on
others for help with activities of everyday
life, including bathing, dressing, and
taking medicine. People who are frail may
appear to be easy victims.

What Are Signs of Abuse?
You may see signs of abuse or neglect
when you visit an older person at home
or in an eldercare facility. You may notice
the person:
■ Has trouble sleeping.
■ Seems depressed or confused.
■ Loses weight for no reason.
■ Displays signs of trauma, like rocking
back and forth.
■ Acts agitated or violent.
■ Becomes withdrawn.
■ Stops taking part in activities he or
she enjoys.
■ Has unexplained bruises, burns, or scars.
■ Looks messy, with unwashed hair or
dirty clothes.
■ Develops bed sores or other preventable
conditions.
If you see signs of abuse, try talking with
the older person to find out what’s going
on. For instance, the abuse may be from
another resident and not from someone
who works at the nursing home or assisted
living facility. Most importantly, get help.

Who Can Help?
Elder abuse will not stop on its own.
Someone else needs to step in and help.
Many older people are too ashamed to
report mistreatment. Or, they’re afraid if
they make a report it will get back to the
abuser and make the situation worse.

If you think someone you know is
being abused, physically, emotionally,
or financially talk with him or her
when the two of you are alone. You could
say you think something is wrong and
you’re worried. Offer to take him or her
to get help, for instance, at a local adult
protective services agency.
Many local, State, and national social
service agencies can help with emotional,
legal, and financial problems.
The Administration for Community
Living has a National Center on Elder Abuse
where you can learn about how to report
abuse, where to get help, and State laws
that deal with abuse and neglect. 
Most States require that doctors and
lawyers report elder mistreatment. Family
and friends can also report it. Do not wait.
Help is available.
If you think someone is in urgent
danger, call 911 or your local police to
get help right away.

Caregiver Stress You’re Not Alone
Caring for an older person can be rewarding. It’s also demanding, difficult, and
often stressful work. The caregiver may need to be available around the clock
to fix meals, provide nursing care, take care of laundry and cleaning, drive to
doctors’ appointments, and pay bills. Often, family caregivers have to give up
paying jobs to make time for these new responsibilities.
It may be hard to keep a positive outlook when there’s little hope of the older
person’s physical and mental condition improving. Over time, the demands and
stress of caregiving can take their toll. A caregiver might not even know he or she
is being neglectful or abusive.
If you are a caregiver, make sure you have time to rest and take care of your
needs. You can ask a family member or friend to help out for a weekend, or even
for a few hours, so that you can take some time for yourself. Some community
service organizations provide caregivers a break, called respite care. Visit the
ARCH National Respite Network and Resource Center’s National Respite Locator
at https://archrespite.org/respitelocator to find respite services in your area.
Caregiving support groups may also help. Exercise could even help with stress.

What Is the Long Term Effect
of Abuse?
Most physical wounds heal in time.
But, any type of mistreatment can leave
the abused person feeling fearful and
depressed. Sometimes, the victim thinks
the abuse is his or her fault. Protective
services agencies can suggest support
groups and counseling that can help the
abused person heal the emotional wounds.
Aging and Your Eyes
Are you holding the newspaper farther away
from your eyes than you used to? Join the
crowd, age can bring changes that affect
your eyesight. Some changes are more serious
than others, but for many problems, there are
things you can do to protect your vision. The
key is to have regular eye exams so you can
spot problems early.

How Can You Protect Your
Eyesight?
Have your eyes checked regularly
by an eye care professional, either an
ophthalmologist or optometrist. People
over age 60 should have dilated eye
exams yearly. During this exam, the eye
care professional will put drops in your
eyes to widen (dilate) your pupils so that
he or she can look at the back of each
eye. This is the only way to find some
common eye diseases that have no early
signs or symptoms. If you wear glasses or
contact lenses, your prescription should be
checked, too. See your doctor regularly to
check for diseases like diabetes and high
blood pressure. These diseases can cause
eye problems if not controlled or treated.
See an eye care professional right
away if you:
■ Suddenly cannot see or everything
looks blurry.
■ See flashes of light.
■ Have eye pain.
■ Experience double vision.
■ Have redness or swelling of your eye
or eyelid.

Common Eye Problems.
The following common eye problems
can be easily treated. But, sometimes
they can be signs of more serious issues.
■ Presbyopia is
a slow loss of ability to see close objects
or small print. It is normal to have this
problem as you get older. People with
presbyopia often have headaches or
strained, tired eyes. Reading glasses
usually fix the problem.
■ Floaters are tiny specks or “cobwebs”
that seem to float across your vision.
You might see them in well-lit rooms or
outdoors on a bright day. Floaters can be a
normal part of aging. But, sometimes they
are a sign of a more serious eye problem
such as retinal detachment. If you see
many new floaters and/or flashes of light,
see your eye care professional right away.
■ Tearing (or having too many tears)
can come from being sensitive to light,
wind, or temperature changes, or having
a condition called dry eye. Wearing
sunglasses may help. So might eye drops.
Sometimes tearing is a sign of a more
serious eye problem, like an infection
or a blocked tear duct. Your eye care
professional can treat these problems.
■ Eyelid problems can result from
different diseases or conditions. Common
eyelid problems include red and swollen
eyelids, itching, tearing, and crusting of
eyelashes during sleep. These problems
may be caused by a condition called
blepharitis and treated with
warm compresses and gentle eyelid scrubs.

7 Tips for Healthy Eyes.
■ Protect your eyes from too much sunlight by wearing sunglasses that block ultraviolet (UV)
radiation and a hat with a wide brim when you are outside.
■ Stop smoking.
■ Make smart food choices.
■ Be physically active and maintain a healthy weight.
■ Maintain normal blood pressure.
■ Control diabetes (if you have it).
■ If you spend a lot of time at the computer or focused on one thing, you can forget to blink.
Every 20 minutes, look away about 20 feet for 20 seconds to prevent eye strain.


Eye Diseases and Disorders
The following eye conditions can lead
to vision loss and blindness. They may
have few or no early symptoms. Regular
eye exams are your best protection. If
your eye care professional finds a problem
early, often there are things you can do to
keep your eyesight.
■ Cataracts are cloudy areas in the
eye’s lens causing blurred or hazy
vision. Some cataracts stay small and
don’t change your eyesight a lot. Others
become large and reduce vision. Cataract
surgery can restore good vision. It is a
safe and common treatment. If you have
a cataract, your eye care professional will
watch for changes over time to see if you
would benefit from surgery.
■ Corneal diseases and conditions
can cause redness, watery eyes, pain,
problems with vision, or a halo effect
of the vision (things appear to have an
aura of light around them). Infection
and injury are some of the things that
can hurt the cornea. Treatment may
be simple, for example, changing your
eyeglass prescription or using eye drops.
In severe cases, surgery may be needed.
■ Dry eye happens when tear glands
don’t work well. You may feel stinging or
burning, a sandy feeling as if something
is in the eye, or other discomfort. Dry
eye is more common as people get older,
especially for women. Your eye care
professional may tell you to use a home
humidifier or air cleaner, special eye
drops (artificial tears), or ointments to
treat dry eye.
■ Glaucoma often comes from too
much fluid pressure inside the eye. If
not treated, it can lead to vision loss and
blindness. People with glaucoma often
have no early symptoms or pain. You
can protect yourself by having dilated
eye exams yearly. Glaucoma can be
treated with prescription eye drops,
lasers, or surgery.
■ Retinal disorders are a leading cause
of blindness in the United States. Retinal
disorders that affect aging eyes include:
■ Age related macular degeneration
(AMD). AMD can harm the sharp,
central vision needed to see objects
clearly and to do common things like
driving and reading. During a dilated
eye exam, your eye care professional
will look for signs of AMD. There
are treatments for AMD. If you
have AMD, ask if special dietary
supplements could lower your chance
of it getting worse.
■ Diabetic retinopathy. This problem
may occur if you have diabetes.
Diabetic retinopathy develops slowly
and often has no early warning
signs. If you have diabetes, be sure
to have a dilated eye exam at least
once a year. Keeping your blood
sugar, blood pressure, and cholesterol
under control can prevent diabetic
retinopathy or slow its progress. Laser
surgery can sometimes prevent it
from getting worse.
■ Retinal detachment. THIS IS A
MEDICAL EMERGENCY. When the
retina separates from the back of the
eye, it’s called retinal detachment. If
you see new floaters or light flashes,
or if it seems like a curtain has been
pulled over your eye, go to your eye
care professional right away. With
treatment, doctors often can prevent
loss of vision.

What Is Low Vision?
Low vision means you cannot fix
your eyesight with glasses, contact lenses,
medicine, or surgery. Low vision affects
some people as they age. You may have
low vision if you:
■ Can’t see well enough to do everyday
tasks like reading, cooking, or sewing.
■ Have difficulty recognizing the faces
of your friends or family.
■ Have trouble reading street signs.
■ Find that lights don’t seem as bright
If you have any of these problems, ask
your eye care professional to test you for
low vision. Special tools can help people
with low vision to read, write, and manage
daily tasks. These tools include large print
reading materials, magnifying aids, closed circuit 
televisions, audio tapes, electronic
reading machines, and computers with
large print and a talking function.
Other tips that may help:
■ Brighten the lighting in your room.
■ Write with bold, black felt-tip
markers.
■ Use paper with bold lines to help
you write in a straight line.
■ Put colored tape on the edge of your
steps to help you see them and prevent
you from falling.
■ Install dark colored light switches
and electrical outlets that you can see
easily against light colored walls.
■ Use motion lights that turn on when
you enter a room. These may help you
avoid accidents caused by poor lighting.
■ Use telephones, clocks, and watches
with large numbers; put large print
labels on the microwave and stove.
Remember to ask your eye doctor if
your vision is okay for safe driving.
Skin Care and Aging.
Cynthia had always been proud of her skin,
especially her summer tan. But as years went
by, she saw her skin getting more fine lines and
wrinkles. Cynthia began to worry about what
other skin problems she might have. What are
those brown spots on her hands and arms?
Your skin changes with age. It becomes
thinner, loses fat, and no longer looks as
plump and smooth as it once did. Your
veins and bones can be seen more easily.
Scratches, cuts, or bumps can take
longer to heal. Years of sun tanning or
being out in the sunlight for a long time
may lead to wrinkles, dryness, age spots,
and even cancer. But, there are things
you can do to protect your skin and to
make it feel and look better.

Dry Skin and Itching
Many older people suffer from dry spots
on their skin, often on their lower legs,
elbows, and lower arms. Dry skin patches
feel rough and scaly. There are many
possible reasons for dry skin, such as:
■ Not drinking enough liquids.
■ Spending too much time in the sun
or sun tanning.
■ Being in very dry air.
■ Smoking.
■ Feeling stress.
■ Losing sweat and oil glands, which is
common with age.

Dry skin also can be caused by
health problems, such as diabetes or
kidney disease. Using too much soap,
antiperspirant, or perfume and taking
hot baths can make dry skin worse.
Some medicines can make skin itchy.
Because older people have thinner skin,
scratching can cause bleeding that may
lead to infection. Talk to your doctor if
your skin is very dry and itchy.
Here are some ways to help dry,
itchy skin:
■ Use moisturizers, like lotions, creams,
or ointments, every day.
■ Take fewer baths or showers and use
milder soap. Warm water is less drying
than hot water. Don’t add bath oil to your
water. It can make the tub too slippery.
■ Try using a humidifier, an appliance
that adds moisture to a room.

Bruises.
Older people may bruise more easily
than younger people. It can take longer
for these bruises to heal. Some medicines
or illnesses may also cause bruising. Talk
to your doctor if you see bruises and don’t
know how you got them, especially on parts
of your body usually covered by clothing.

Wrinkles.
Over time, skin begins to wrinkle.
Things in the environment, like ultraviolet
(UV) light from the sun, can make the
skin less elastic. Gravity can cause skin
to sag and wrinkle. Certain habits, like
smoking, also can wrinkle the skin.
A lot of claims are made about how
to make wrinkles go away. Most of them
don’t work. Some methods can be painful
or even dangerous, and many must be
done by a doctor. Talk with a doctor
specially trained in skin problems,
called a dermatologist, or your regular
doctor if you are worried about wrinkles.

Age Spots and Skin Tags.
Age spots, once called “liver spots,” are
flat, brown spots often caused by years in
the sun. They are bigger than freckles and
commonly show up on areas like the face,
hands, arms, back, and feet. Using a 
broad spectrum sunscreen that helps protect
against two types of the sun’s rays (UVA
and UVB) may prevent more age spots.
Skin tags are small, usually flesh colored growths 
of skin that have a raised
surface. They become common as people
age, especially for women. They are most
often found on the eyelids, neck, and body
folds such as the armpit, chest, and groin.
Age spots and skin tags are harmless,
although sometimes skin tags can
become irritated. If your age spots or
skin tags bother you, talk to your
doctor about having them removed.

Skin Cancer.
Skin cancer is a very common type of
cancer in the United States. The main
cause of skin cancer is the sun. Sunlamps
and tanning booths can also cause skin
cancer. Anyone, of any skin color, can get
skin cancer. People with fair skin that
freckles easily are at greatest risk. Skin
cancer may be cured if it is found before
it spreads to other parts of the body.
There are three types of skin cancers.
Two types, basal cell carcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma, grow slowly and
rarely spread to other parts of the body.
These types of cancer are usually found
on parts of the skin most often exposed
to the sun, like the head, face, neck,
hands, and arms. But they can happen
anywhere on your body. The third and
most dangerous type of skin cancer is
melanoma. It is rarer than the other
types, but it can spread to other organs
and be deadly.
Check your skin once a month for
things that may be signs of cancer. Skin
cancer is rarely painful. Look for changes
such as a new growth, a sore that doesn’t
heal, or a bleeding mole.
Check moles, birthmarks, or other
parts of the skin for the “ABCDE’s”
A = Asymmetry (one half of the growth
looks different from the other half)
B = Borders that are irregular
C = Color changes or more than one color
D = Diameter greater than the size of a
pencil eraser
E = Evolving; this means the growth
changes in size, shape, symptoms
(itching, tenderness), surface (especially
bleeding), or shades of color
See your doctor right away if you have any
of these signs to make sure it is not skin
cancer.

Keep Your Skin Healthy.
Some sun can be good for you, but to
keep your skin healthy, be careful:
■ Limit time in the sun. It’s okay to go out
during the day, but try to avoid being in
sun during peak times when the sun’s rays
are strongest. For example, during the
summer, try to stay out of the sun between
10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Don’t be fooled by
cloudy skies. The sun’s rays can go through
clouds. You can also get sunburned if you
are in water, so be careful when you are in
a pool, lake, or the ocean.
■ Use sunscreen. Look for sunscreen
with an SPF (sun protection factor) number
of 15 or higher. It’s best to choose sunscreens with “broad spectrum” on the label.
Put the sunscreen on 15 to 30 minutes
before you go outside. Sunscreen should be
reapplied at least every 2 hours. You need
to put sunscreen on more often if you are
swimming, sweating, or rubbing your skin
with a towel.
■ Wear protective clothing. A hat with a
wide brim can shade your neck, ears,
eyes, and head. Look for sunglasses that
block 99 to 100 percent of the sun’s rays.
If you have to be in the sun, wear loose,
lightweight, long sleeved shirts and long
pants or long skirts.
■ Avoid tanning. Don’t use sunlamps
or tanning beds. Tanning pills are not
approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and might not
be safe.

Your skin may change with age. But
remember, there are things you can do to
help. Check your skin often. If you find any
changes that worry you, see your doctor.
Older Drivers
At age 78, Sheila thinks she’s a good driver,
but, this year, she’s had a minor accident and
several near misses. She’s noticed a few new
dents on her car and doesn’t know how they
got there. Sheila wonders how she can stay
safe behind the wheel.
Have you been worried about your
driving? Have your family or friends
expressed concern? Changes in your
health may affect your driving skills over
time. Don’t risk hurting yourself or others.
Talk with your doctor about any concerns
you have about your health and driving.

Stiff Joints and Muscles
As you age, your joints may get stiff,
and your muscles may weaken. Arthritis,
which is common among older adults,
might affect your ability to drive. These
changes can make it harder to turn your
head to look back, turn the steering
wheel quickly, or brake safely.

Safe driving tips:
■ See your doctor if pain, stiffness, or
arthritis seem to get in the way of your
driving.
■ If possible, drive a car with automatic
transmission, power steering, power
brakes, and large mirrors.
■ Be physically active or exercise to
keep and even improve your strength
and flexibility.
■ Think about getting hand controls
for both the gas and brake pedals if you
have leg problems.

Trouble Seeing.
Your eyesight can change as you get
older. It might be harder to see people,
things, and movement outside your direct
line of sight. It may take longer to read
street or traffic signs or even recognize
familiar places. At night, you may have
trouble seeing things clearly. Glare from
oncoming headlights or street lights can
be a problem. Depending on the time of
the day, the sun might be blinding.
Eye diseases, such as glaucoma,
cataracts, and macular degeneration, as
well as some medicines, can also cause
vision problems.
Safe driving tips:
■ If you are 65 or older, see your eye
doctor every year. Ask if there are ways
to improve your eyesight.
■ If you need glasses or contact lenses to
see far away while driving, make sure your
prescription is up to date and correct.
Always wear them when you are driving.
■ Cut back on or stop driving at night
if you have trouble seeing in the dark.
Try to avoid driving during sunrise and
sunset, when the sun can be directly in
your line of vision.

Trouble Hearing.
As you get older, your hearing can
change, making it harder to notice horns,
sirens, or even noises coming from your
own car. Hearing loss can be a problem
because these sounds warn you when you
may need to pull over or get out of the way.
Safe driving tips:
■ Have your hearing checked at least
every 3 years after age 50.
■ Discuss concerns you have about
hearing with your doctor. There may be
things that can help.
■ Try to keep the inside of the car as
quiet as possible while driving.

Slower Reaction Time and
Reflexes.
As you get older, your reflexes might
get slower, and you might not react as
quickly as you could in the past. You might
find that you have a shorter attention span,
making it harder to do two things at once.

Stiff joints or weak muscles also can make it
harder to move quickly. Loss of feeling or
tingling in your fingers and feet can make
it difficult to steer or use the foot pedals.
Parkinson’s disease or limitations following
a stroke can make it no longer safe to drive.
Safe driving tips:
■ Leave more space between you and
the car in front of you.
■ Start braking early when you need
to stop.
■ Avoid heavy traffic areas or rush hour
driving when you can.
■ If you must drive on a fast moving
highway, drive in the right hand lane.
Traffic moves more slowly there, giving you
more time to make safe driving decisions.

Medications Can Affect Driving
Do you take any medicines that make
you feel drowsy, lightheaded, or less
alert than usual? Do medicines you take
have a warning about driving? Many
medications have side effects that can
make driving unsafe. Pay attention to
how these drugs may affect your driving.
Safe driving tips:
■ Read medicine labels carefully. Look
for any warnings.
■ Make a list of all of your medicines,
and talk with your doctor or pharmacist
about how they can affect your driving.
■ Don’t drive if you feel lightheaded
or drowsy.

Dementia and Driving.
In the early stages of Alzheimer’s disease
or other types of dementia, some people
are able to keep driving. But, as memory
and decision making skills get worse, they
need to stop.
People with dementia often do not know
they are having driving problems. Family
and friends need to monitor the person’s
driving ability and take action as soon as
they observe a potential problem, such
as forgetting how to find familiar places
like the grocery store or even their home.
Work with the doctor to let the person
know it’s no longer safe to keep driving.

Be a Safe Driver.
Maybe you already know that driving
at night, on the highway, or in bad weather
is a problem for you. Some older drivers
also have problems when yielding the right
of way, turning (especially making left
turns), changing lanes, passing, and using
expressway ramps.
Safe driving tips:
■ Have your driving skills checked by a
driving rehabilitation specialist, occupational
therapist, or other trained professional.
■ Take a defensive driving course. Some
car insurance companies may lower your
bill when you pass this type of class.
Organizations like AARP, American
Automobile Association (AAA), or your
car insurance company can help you find
a class near you. 
■ When in doubt, don’t go out. Bad
weather like rain, ice, or snow can make it
hard for anyone to drive. Try to wait until
the weather is better, or use buses, taxis,
or other transportation services.
■ Avoid areas where driving can be a
problem. For example, choose a route
that avoids highways or other highspeed roadways. Or, find a way to go
that requires few or no left turns.
■ Ask your doctor if any of your health
problems or medications might make
it unsafe for you to drive. Together,
you can make a plan to help you keep
driving and decide when it is no longer
safe to drive.

Do You Have Concerns About
an Older Driver?
Are you worried about an older
family member or friend driving?
Sometimes, it can be hard for an older
person to realize that he or she is no
longer a safe driver. You might want to
observe the person’s driving skills.

If it’s not possible to observe the older
person driving, look out for these signs:
■ Multiple vehicle crashes, near misses,
and/or new dents in the car.
■ Two or more traffic tickets or warnings
within the last 2 years; increases in car
insurance premiums because of driving issues.
■ Comments from neighbors or friends
about driving.
■ Anxiety about driving at night.
■ Health issues that might affect driving
ability, including problems with vision,
hearing, and/or movement.
■ Complaints about the speed, sudden
lane changes, or actions of other drivers.
■ Recommendations from a doctor to
modify driving habits or quit driving entirely.

Is It Time to Give Up Driving?
We all age differently. For this reason,
there is no way to set one age when
everyone should stop driving. So, how
do you know if you should stop? To help
decide, ask yourself:

■ Do other drivers often honk at me?
■ Have I had some accidents, even if
they were only “fender benders”?
■ Do I get lost, even on roads I know?
■ Do cars or people walking seem to
appear out of nowhere?
■ Do I get distracted while driving?
■ Have family, friends, or my doctor
said they’re worried about my driving?
■ Am I driving less these days because I’m
not as sure about my driving as I used to be?
■ Do I have trouble staying in my lane?
■ Do I have trouble moving my foot
between the gas and the brake pedals,
or do I sometimes confuse the two?
■ Have I been pulled over by a police
officer about my driving?
If you answered “yes” to any of these
questions, it may be time to talk with
your doctor about driving or have a
driving assessment.

Having “The Talk” About Driving.
Talking with an older person about his or her driving is often difficult. Here are some things
that might help when having the talk.
■ Be prepared. Learn about local services to help someone who can no longer drive. Identify.
the person’s transportation needs.
■ Avoid confrontation. Use “I” messages rather than “You” messages. For example, say, “I am
concerned about your safety when you are driving,” rather than, “You’re no longer a safe driver.”
■ Stick to the issue. Discuss the driver’s skills, not his or her age.
■ Focus on safety and maintaining independence. Be clear that the goal is for the older
driver to continue the activities he or she currently enjoys while staying safe. Offer to help
the person stay independent. For example, you might say, “I’ll help you figure out how to
get where you want to go if driving isn’t possible.”
■ Be positive and supportive. Recognize the importance of a driver’s license to the older
person. Understand that he or she may become defensive, angry, hurt, or withdrawn. You might
say, “I understand that this may be upsetting” or “We’ll work together to find a solution.”



How Will You Get Around?
Are you worried you won’t be able to
do the things you want and need to do if
you stop driving? Many people have this
concern, but there may be more ways to
get around than you think. For example,
some areas provide free or low cost bus
or taxi services for older people. Some
communities offer a carpool service or
scheduled trips to the grocery store, mall,
or doctor’s office. Religious and civic
groups sometimes have volunteers who
will drive you where you want to go.
Your local Area Agency on Aging can
help you find services in your area. 
You can also think about using a car
or ride sharing service. Sound pricey?
Don’t forget, it costs a lot to own a car.

If you don’t have to make car payments
or pay for insurance, maintenance, gas,
oil, or other car expenses, then you
may be able to afford to take taxis or
other transportation. You can also buy
gas for friends or family members who
give you rides.

More Safe Driving Tips
Before you leave home:
■ Plan to drive on streets you know.
■ Only drive to places that are easy to get
to and close to home.
■ Avoid risky spots like ramps and left turns.
■ Add extra time for travel if you must
drive when conditions are poor.
■ Limit how much you drive at night.
■ Don’t drive when you are stressed or tired.

While you are driving:
■ Always wear your seat belt and make sure
your passengers wear their seat belts, too.
■ Wear your glasses and/or hearing aid, if
you use them.
■ Stay off your cell phone.
■ Avoid distractions such as eating, listening
to the radio, or chatting.
■ Use your window defrosters to keep both
the front and back windows clear.
Fatigue: More Than Being Tired
“You better get up soon,” Dan called to his
wife, Liang. “The grandchildren will be
here in an hour for lunch.”
“I don’t know what’s wrong with me,” Liang
said. “I feel so tired. I’m not even sure I can
get out of bed. I just don’t seem to have any
energy, not even for my family.”
Everyone feels tired now and then.
But, after a good night’s sleep, most
people feel refreshed and ready to face
a new day. If, like Liang, you continue
to feel tired for weeks, it’s time to see
your doctor. He or she may be able
to help you find out what’s causing
your fatigue. In fact, your doctor may
even suggest you become more active,
as exercise may reduce fatigue and
improve quality of life.

Some Illnesses Cause Fatigue
Sometimes, fatigue can be the
first sign that something is wrong
in your body. For example, people
with rheumatoid arthritis, a painful
condition that affects the joints, often
complain of fatigue. People with
cancer may feel fatigued from the
disease, treatments, or both.
Many medical problems and
treatments can add to fatigue. These
include:
■ Taking certain medications, such as
antidepressants, antihistamines, and
medicines for nausea and pain
■ Having medical treatments, like
chemotherapy and radiation, or
recovering from major surgery.
■ Infections.
■ Chronic diseases like diabetes,
heart disease, kidney disease, liver
disease, thyroid disease, and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
■ Untreated pain and diseases like
fibromyalgia.
■ Anemia.
■ Sleep apnea and other sleep
disorders.
Managing a health problem may
make the fatigue go away. Your doctor
can help.

Can Emotions Cause Fatigue?
Are you fearful about the future?
Do you worry about your health and
who will take care of you? Are you
afraid you are no longer needed?
Emotional stresses like these can take
a toll on your energy. Fatigue can be
linked to many conditions, including:

■ Anxiety.
■ Depression.
■ Grief from loss of family or friends.
■ Stress from financial or personal
problems.
■ Feeling that you no longer have
control over your life.
Not getting enough sleep can also
contribute to fatigue. Regular physical
activity can improve your sleep. It may
also help reduce feelings of depression
and stress while improving your mood
and overall well-being. Yoga, meditation,
or cognitive behavioral therapy could
also help you get more rest. Talk with
your doctor if your mental well-being
is affecting your sleep or making you
tired.

What Else Causes Fatigue?
Some lifestyle habits can make you
feel tired. Here are some things that
may be draining your energy:
■ Staying up too late. A good night’s
sleep is important to feeling refreshed
and energetic. Try going to bed and
waking up at the same time every day.
■ Having too much caffeine.
Drinking caffeinated drinks like soda,
tea, or coffee late in the day can keep
you from getting a good night’s sleep.
Limit the amount of caffeine you have
during the day and avoid it in the
evening.
■ Drinking too much alcohol.
Alcohol changes the way you think
and act. It may also interact with your
medicines.
■ Eating junk food. Say “no thanks” to
food with empty calories, like fried foods
and sweets, which have few nutrients
and are high in fat and sugars. Choose
nutritious foods to get the energy you
need to do the things you enjoy.
■ Getting too little or too much 
exercise. Regular exercise can boost 
your energy levels, but don't overdo
it. 

Can Boredom Cause Fatigue?
Being bored can make you feel tired. That
may sound strange, but it’s true. If you
were very busy during your working years,
you may feel lost about how to spend
your time when you retire. When you
wake up in the morning, you may see long
days stretching before you with nothing
planned. It doesn’t have to be that way.
Engaging in social and productive activities
that you enjoy, like volunteering in your
community, may help maintain your wellbeing. 
Think about what interests you and
what skills or knowledge you have to offer
and look for places to volunteer.

How Can I Feel Less Tired?
Some changes to your lifestyle can
make you feel less tired. Here are some
suggestions:
■ Keep a fatigue diary to help you
find patterns throughout the day when
you feel more or less tired.
■ Exercise regularly. Almost anyone,
at any age, can do some type of
physical activity. If you have concerns
about starting an exercise program, ask
your doctor if there are any activities
you should avoid. Moderate exercise
may improve your appetite, energy,
and outlook. Some people find that
exercises combining balance and
breathing (for example, tai chi or yoga)
improve their energy.
■ Try to avoid long naps (over
30 minutes) late in the day. Long naps
can leave you feeling groggy and may
make it harder to fall asleep at night.
■ Stop smoking. Smoking is linked
to many diseases and disorders, such
as cancer, heart disease, and breathing
problems, which can drain your energy.
■ Ask for help if you feel swamped.
Some people have so much to do that just
thinking about their schedules can make
them feel tired. Working with others may
help a job go faster and be more fun.

When Should I See a Doctor
for Fatigue?
If you’ve been tired for several weeks
with no relief, it may be time to call your
healthcare provider. He or she will ask
questions about your sleep, daily activities,
appetite, and exercise and will likely give
you a physical exam and order lab tests.
Your treatment will be based on your
history and the results of your exam
and lab tests. Your doctor may prescribe
medications to target underlying health
problems, such as anemia or irregular
thyroid activity. He or she may suggest
that you eat a well-balanced diet and
begin an exercise program.

What Is Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome?
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), also
known as myalgic encephalomyelitis
(ME) or ME/CFS, is a condition in which
fatigue lasts 6 months or longer and
is not related to other diseases or
conditions. People with CFS experience
symptoms that make it hard to do daily
tasks like dressing or bathing. Along
with severe fatigue that doesn’t get
better with rest, CFS symptoms can
include problems with sleep, memory
and concentrating, pain, dizziness, sore
throat, and tender lymph nodes. 
Exercise and Physical Activity: Getting Fit for Life
“My wife, Miki, and I have heart problems.
About 2 years ago, we joined our local health
club, where we do both endurance and
strength training exercises. On the off days,
we walk near our house, stretch, and do a few
balance exercises. Being active helps us feel
better, and it’s good for our hearts!”
Bob and Miki know that exercise and
physical activity are good for you,
no matter how old you are. In fact,
staying active can help you:
■ Keep and improve your strength so
you can stay independent.
■ Have more energy to do the things
you want to do.
■ Improve your balance and prevent
falls.
■ Prevent or delay some diseases
like heart disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes,
osteoporosis, and certain types of cancer.
■ Perk up your mood and reduce
feelings of depression.
■ Sleep better at night.
■ Reduce levels of stress and anxiety.
■ Reach or maintain a healthy weight.
You don’t need to buy special clothes
or belong to a gym to become more
active. Physical activity can and should
be part of your everyday life. Find things
you like to do. Go for brisk walks. Ride
a bike. Dance. Work around the house.
Garden. Climb stairs. Swim. Rake leaves.
Try different kinds of activities that keep
you moving. Look for new ways to build
physical activity into your daily routine.

Four Ways to Be Active.
To get all of the benefits of physical
activity, try all four types of exercise:
(1) endurance, (2) strength, (3) balance,
and (4) flexibility.
1. Try to build up to at least 30 minutes
of activity that makes you breathe hard
on most or all days of the week. Every
day is best. That’s called an endurance
activity because it builds your energy or
“staying power.” You don’t have to be 
active for 30 minutes all at once. Try
to be active throughout your day to
reach this goal, and avoid sitting for
long periods of time.
How hard do you need to push
yourself? If you can talk without any
trouble at all, you are not working
hard enough. If you can’t talk at all,
it’s too hard.
2. Keep using your muscles. Strength
exercises build muscles. When you
have strong muscles, you can get up
from a chair by yourself, lift your
grandchildren, and walk through
the park.
Keeping your muscles strong can
help with your balance and prevent
falls and fall related injuries. You are
less likely to fall when your leg and hip
muscles are strong.
3. Do things to help your balance. Try
standing on one foot, then the other.
If at first you need support, hold on to
something sturdy. Work your way up
to doing the exercises without support.
Get up from a chair without using
your hands or arms. Try the heel to toe walk. As you walk, put the heel
of one foot just in front of the toes of
your other foot. Your heel and toes
should touch or almost touch.
4. Stretching can improve your
flexibility. Moving more freely will
make it easier for you to reach down
to tie your shoes or look over your
shoulder when you back your car out
of the driveway. Stretch when your
muscles are warmed up. Don’t stretch
so far that it hurts.

Who Should Exercise?
Almost anyone, at any age, can do
some type of physical activity. You can
still exercise even if you have a health
condition like heart disease, arthritis,
chronic pain, or diabetes. In fact, physical
activity may help. For most older adults,
brisk walking, riding a bike, swimming,
weight lifting, and gardening are safe,
especially if you build up slowly. If you
have any symptoms that haven’t been
diagnosed, or if you have a chronic
condition that is not being monitored by
a doctor, check with your doctor before
beginning an exercise routine. You can
always talk to your doctor if it makes you
more comfortable when starting to
be active.

Safety Tips.
Here are some things you can do to
make sure you are exercising safely:
■ Start slowly, especially if you haven’t
been active for a long time. Little by
little, build up your activities and how
hard you work at them.
■ Don’t hold your breath during strength
exercises. That could cause changes in
your blood pressure. It may seem strange
at first, but you should breathe out as you
lift something and breathe in as you relax.
■ Use safety equipment. For example,
wear a helmet for bike riding and the
right shoes for walking or jogging.
■ Unless your doctor has asked you to
limit fluids, be sure to drink plenty of
fluids when you are doing activities, even
if you don’t feel thirsty.
■ Always bend forward from the hips,
not the waist. If you keep your back
straight, you’re probably bending the
right way.
■ Warm up your muscles before you
stretch. Try walking and light arm
pumping first.

Exercise should not hurt or make
you feel really tired. You might feel
some soreness, a little discomfort, or a
bit weary, but you should not feel pain.
In fact, in many ways, being active will
probably make you feel better.

For More Information About Exercise and Physical Activity
Local fitness centers or hospitals
might be able to help you find a physical
activity program that works for you. You
also can check with nearby religious
groups, senior and civic centers, parks,
recreation associations, YMCAs, YWCAs,
JCCs, or even area shopping malls for
exercise, wellness, or walking programs.
Looking for more information on how
to begin an exercise plan and keep going?
Visit Go4Life® at https://go4life.nia.nih.gov.
This exercise and physical activity website
from the National Institute on Aging has
exercise examples, tracking worksheets,
workout videos, and tips to help you stay
motivated.
The following resources have
information about physical activity and
exercise for older adults to help you
get started.
Dietary Supplements.
Bill is retired and lives alone. Often, he’s just
not hungry or is too tired to fix a whole meal.
Does he need a multivitamin, or should he
take one of those dietary supplements he sees in
ads everywhere? Bill wonders if they work, 
will one help keep his joints healthy or another
give him more energy? And, are they safe?

What Is a Dietary Supplement?
Dietary supplements are substances
you might use to add nutrients to your
diet or to lower your risk of health
problems, like osteoporosis or arthritis.
Dietary supplements come in the form of
pills, capsules, powders, gel tabs, extracts,
or liquids. They might contain vitamins,
minerals, fiber, amino acids, herbs or
other plants, or enzymes. Sometimes,
the ingredients in dietary supplements
are added to foods, including drinks. A
doctor’s prescription is not needed to buy
dietary supplements.

Should I Take a Dietary Supplement?
Eating a variety of healthy foods
is the best way to get the nutrients
you need. However, some people
don’t get enough vitamins and
minerals from their daily diet, and
their doctors may recommend a
supplement. Dietary supplements
may provide nutrients that might be
missing from your daily diet.
Talk with your doctor before taking
any supplements. Some supplements
can change how medicines you
may already be taking will work. If
your doctor recommends a dietary
supplement for you, make sure you’re
getting the brand recommended by the
doctor and that you take it as directed.
Do you wonder if you need a
dietary supplement? Maybe you do,
but usually not. Ask yourself why you
think you might want to take a dietary
supplement. Are you concerned
about getting enough nutrients? Is a
friend, a neighbor, or someone on a
commercial suggesting you take one?
Some ads for dietary supplements in
magazines, online, or on TV seem to
promise that these supplements will
make you feel better, keep you from
getting sick, or even help you live
longer. Often, there is little, if any,
good scientific research supporting
these claims. Supplements may cost a
lot, could be harmful, or simply might
not be helpful. Talk to your doctor or
a registered dietitian for advice.

What If I’m Over 50?
People over age 50 may need more of
some vitamins and minerals than younger
adults do. Your doctor or a dietitian can
tell you whether you need to change
your diet or take a vitamin or mineral
supplement to get enough of these:
■ Calcium. Calcium works with
vitamin D to keep bones strong at all
ages. Bone loss can lead to fractures in
both older women and men. Calcium
is found in milk and milk products (fat free or low fat is best), canned fish with
soft bones, dark green leafy vegetables
like kale, and foods with calcium
added, like breakfast cereals.
■ Vitamin D. Most people’s bodies
make enough vitamin D if they are in the
sun for 15 to 30 minutes at least twice a
week. But, if you are older, you may not
be able to get enough vitamin D that
way. Try adding vitamin D fortified milk
and milk products, vitamin D fortified
cereals, and fatty fish to your diet, and/or
use a vitamin D supplement.
■ Vitamin B6. This vitamin is needed
to form red blood cells. It is found in
potatoes, bananas, chicken breasts, and
fortified cereals.
Vitamin B12 helps keep your red
blood cells and nerves healthy. While
older adults need just as much vitamin
B12 as other adults, some have trouble
absorbing the vitamin naturally found
in food. If you have this problem, your
doctor may recommend that you eat
foods like fortified cereals that have this
vitamin added, or use a B12 supplement.

What Are Antioxidants?
You might hear about antioxidants in
the news. These are natural substances
in food that might help protect you from
some diseases. Here are some common
sources of antioxidants that you should
be sure to include in your diet:
■ Beta-carotene: Fruits and
vegetables that are either dark green or
dark orange.
■ Selenium: Seafood, liver, meat,
and grains.
■ Vitamin C: Citrus fruits, peppers,
tomatoes, and berries.
■ Vitamin E: Wheat germ, nuts,
sesame seeds, and canola, olive,
and peanut oils.

Right now, research results suggest
that large doses of supplements with
antioxidants will not prevent chronic
diseases such as heart disease or
diabetes. In fact, some studies have
shown that taking large doses of some
antioxidants could be harmful. Again,
it is best to check with your doctor
before taking a dietary supplement.

What About Herbal Supplements?
Herbal supplements are dietary
supplements that come from plants.

A few that you may have heard of are
gingko biloba, ginseng, echinacea, and
black cohosh. Researchers are looking
at using herbal supplements to prevent
or treat some health problems. It’s too
soon to know if herbal supplements
are both safe and useful. But, studies of
some have not shown benefits.

Are Dietary Supplements Safe?
Scientists are still working to
answer this question. The U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)
checks prescription medicines, such
as antibiotics or blood pressure
medicines, to make sure they are safe
and do what they promise. The same
is true for over the counter drugs like
pain and cold medicines.
The FDA does not have authority
over dietary supplements in the same
way it does prescription medicines. The
Federal Government does not regularly
test what is in dietary supplements, and
companies are not required to share
information on the safety of a dietary
supplement with the FDA before they
sell it. The companies are responsible
for making sure the supplement is
safe, but the FDA does not evaluate
the safety of the product before the
supplement is sold. So, just because
you see a dietary supplement on a store
shelf does not mean it is safe, that it
does what the label says it will, or that it
contains what the label says it contains.
If the FDA receives reports of
possible problems with a supplement,
it will issue warnings about products
that are clearly unsafe. The FDA
may also take these supplements
off the market. The Federal Trade
Commission looks into reports of ads
that might misrepresent what dietary
supplements do.

A few private groups, such as the
U.S. Pharmacopeia, NSF International,
ConsumerLab.com, and the Natural
Products Association, have their own “seals
of approval” for dietary supplements.
To get such a seal, products must be
made by following good manufacturing
procedures, must contain what is listed
on the label, and must not have harmful
levels of ingredients that don’t belong
there, like lead.

What’s Best for Me?
If you are thinking about using
dietary supplements:
■ Learn. Find out as much as you
can about any dietary supplement you
might take. Talk with your doctor, your
pharmacist, or a registered dietitian. A
supplement that seemed to help your
neighbor might not work for you. If
you are reading fact sheets or checking
websites, be aware of the source of the
information. Could the writer or group
profit from the sale of a particular
supplement? 
■ Remember. Just because something
is said to be “natural” doesn’t mean it 
is safe or good for you. It could have
side effects. It might make a medicine
your doctor prescribed for you either
weaker or stronger. It could also be
harmful to you if you have certain
medical conditions.
■ Tell your doctor. He or she needs
to know if you decide to use a dietary
supplement. Do not diagnose or treat
any health condition without first
checking with your doctor. Learn how
medications can interact with dietary
supplements.
■ Buy wisely. Choose brands that
your doctor, dietitian, or pharmacist
recommend. Don’t buy dietary
supplements with ingredients you
don’t need. Don’t assume that more is
better. It is possible to waste money on
unneeded supplements.
■ Check the science. Make sure any
claim about a dietary supplement is
based on scientific proof. The company
making the dietary supplement should
be able to send you information on
the safety and/or effectiveness of the
ingredients in a product, which you
can then discuss with your doctor.
Remember, if something sounds too
good to be true, it probably is.


What Can I Do to Stay Healthy?
Here’s what one active older person
does:
When she turned 60, Pearl decided she
wanted to stay healthy and active as long as
possible. She was careful about what she ate.
She became more physically active. Now she
takes a long, brisk walk three or four times
a week. In bad weather, she joins the mall
walkers at the local shopping mall. On nice
days, Pearl works in her garden. When she
was younger, Pearl stopped smoking and
started using a seatbelt. She’s even learning
how to use a computer to find healthy
recipes. Last month, she turned 84 and
danced at her granddaughter’s wedding!
Try following Pearl’s example, stick to
a healthy diet, be physically active, keep
your mind active, don’t smoke, see your
doctor regularly, and, in most cases, only
use dietary supplements suggested by
your doctor or pharmacist.

Different Vitamin and Mineral Recommendations for People
Over 50 (2015)
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2015 to 2020 recommend how much of each vitamin and
mineral men and women of different ages need. Sometimes, too much of a vitamin or mineral
can be harmful. Most, if not all, of your daily vitamins and minerals should come from food.
Vitamin B12: 2.4 mcg (micrograms) each day. If you are taking medicine for acid reflux, you
might need a different form, which your healthcare provider can give you.
Calcium: Women over age 50 need 1,200 mg (milligrams) each day. Men need 1,000 mg
between age 51 and 70 and 1,200 mg after 70, but not more than 2,000 mg a day.
Vitamin D: 600 IU (International Units) for people age 51 to 70 and 800 IU for those over 70,
but not more than 4,000 IU each day.
Vitamin B6: 1.7 mg for men and 1.5 mg for women each day.
When thinking about whether you need more of a vitamin or mineral, think about how
much of each nutrient you get from food and drinks, as well as from any supplements you
take. Check with a doctor or dietitian to learn whether you need to supplement your diet. Diabetes in Older People
Diabetes is a serious disease, and it
affects many older adults. People get
diabetes when their blood glucose, also
called blood sugar, is too high. The good
news is that you can take steps to delay
or prevent type 2 diabetes, which is the
most common form of the disease to
develop in older adults. If you already
have diabetes, there are steps you can
take to manage the condition and prevent
diabetes related health problems.

What Is Diabetes?
Our bodies turn a lot of the food
we eat into sugar, called glucose, which
gives us energy. To use glucose as energy,
our body needs insulin, a hormone that
helps glucose get into our cells. If you
have diabetes, your body may not make
enough insulin, may not use insulin in
the right way, or both. That can cause too
much glucose to stay in the blood, which
can cause health problems over time.

Your family doctor may refer you to a doctor
who specializes in taking care of people with
diabetes, called an endocrinologist. Often,
your family doctor will work directly with
you to manage your diabetes.

Types of Diabetes
There are two main kinds of diabetes.
■ In Type 1 diabetes, the body does not
make insulin. Although older adults can
develop this type of diabetes, it begins most
often in children and young adults, who
then have diabetes for life.
■ In Type 2 diabetes, the body does not
make or use insulin well. It is the most
common kind of diabetes. It occurs most
often in middle aged and older adults,
but it can also affect children. Your chance
of getting type 2 diabetes is higher if you
are overweight, inactive, or have a family
history of diabetes. Women with a history
of gestational diabetes (a type of diabetes
that develops during pregnancy) also
have a greater chance of developing
type 2 diabetes later in life.
Diabetes can affect many parts of your
body. It’s important to manage diabetes
because, over time, it can cause serious health
problems like heart disease, stroke, kidney
disease, eye problems, and nerve damage
that may lead to amputation. Also, people
with type 2 diabetes may be at greater risk for
cancer and Alzheimer’s disease.



What Is Prediabetes?
Millions of older Americans have
“prediabetes.” This means their glucose
levels are higher than normal but not
high enough to be called diabetes. People
with prediabetes have a greater chance of
developing type 2 diabetes and having a
heart attack or stroke.
If you have prediabetes, there are
things you can do to prevent or delay
getting type 2 diabetes. Losing weight may
help. Healthy eating and being physically
active can make a big difference. Work
with your doctor to set up a plan to help
you make healthier food choices and get
regular exercise. Get help with quitting
smoking (if you smoke), because smokers
are more likely than nonsmokers to
develop type 2 diabetes. Make sure to ask
how often you should have your glucose
levels checked. Your doctor may also talk
with you about taking medication to delay
or prevent type 2 diabetes.

Symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes may
include feeling tired, increased hunger
or thirst, losing weight without trying,
urinating often, or having trouble with
blurred vision. You may also get skin
infections or heal slowly from cuts and
bruises. Some people with type 2 diabetes
may not realize they have it because
symptoms often develop slowly and
go unnoticed. Sometimes older adults
dismiss these symptoms as “getting
old,” but they can be signs of a serious
problem. Talk with your doctor if you
have any of these symptoms.

Tests for Diabetes
Doctors use several blood tests to help
diagnose diabetes:
■ Random plasma glucose test: given
at any time during the day.
■ A1C test: given at any time during
the day; shows your average glucose level
for the past 3 months.
■ Fasting plasma glucose test: taken
after you have gone without food for at
least 8 hours.
■ Oral glucose tolerance test: taken
after fasting overnight and then again
2 hours after having a sugary drink (This
is not regularly given for type 2 diabetes.)
Your doctor may want you to be
tested for diabetes twice before making a
diagnosis.

Managing Type 2 Diabetes
Many people with type 2 diabetes
can manage their blood glucose levels
with diet and exercise alone. Others may
need diabetes pills or insulin injections,
along with medicines to manage other
conditions like high blood pressure and
high cholesterol. Over time, a person
with diabetes may need both lifestyle
changes and medication.
Once you’ve been told you have
diabetes, a healthcare team will work with
you to create a diabetes management
plan. Your plan will be based on your
lifestyle, preferences, health goals, and
other health conditions you have.
As part of your plan, your doctor
may prescribe one or more medications.
Other healthcare professionals may also
be involved. For example, a diabetes
educator may help you understand
diabetes and provide support as you
make lifestyle changes to manage your
diabetes. A dietitian may help with meal
planning. An exercise coach may help
you become more physically active.

Diabetes and Brain Health
If you have diabetes, your doctor
may screen you for depression or
cognitive impairment. Older adults
with diabetes are at higher risk
for these conditions, compared
with others their age who do not
have diabetes. Having depression
or cognitive impairment can make
diabetes self-care challenging.


Your diabetes management plan will
cover how to:
■ Track your glucose levels. Very high
glucose levels (called hyperglycemia) or very
low glucose levels (called hypoglycemia) can
be risky to your health. Your plan will show
how often you should check your glucose
and how often to get the A1C test. If you
are managing your diabetes without taking
insulin, you may not need to check your
glucose as often.
■ Make healthy food choices. The
food you eat affects glucose levels, so it’s
important to learn what’s best for you
to eat, how much, and when. If you are
overweight, work with your healthcare team
to come up with a plan to lose weight.
■ Be active. Walking and other forms of
daily exercise can help improve glucose
levels in older people with diabetes. Set
a goal to be more active most days of the
week, and create a plan for being physically
active that fits into your life and that you
can follow. Your healthcare team can help.
■ Take your medicines. You should take
medicine as prescribed even when you feel
good. Tell your doctor if you have any side
effects or cannot afford your medicines.
Also, let your doctor know if you have
trouble taking your medicine or keeping
track of your medication schedule.


Here are some ways to stay healthy
with diabetes:
■ Manage your blood pressure. Get
your blood pressure checked often.
■ Manage your cholesterol. At least
once a year, get a blood test to check your
cholesterol and triglyceride levels. High
levels may increase your risk for heart
problems.
■ Stop smoking. Smoking raises your
risk for many health problems, including
heart attack and stroke.
■ Have yearly eye exams. Finding and
treating eye problems early may keep
your eyes healthy.
■ Check your kidneys yearly. Diabetes
can affect your kidneys. Urine and blood
tests will show if your kidneys are okay.
■ Get flu shots every year and the
pneumonia vaccine. A yearly flu shot will
help keep you healthy. If you’re over 65,
make sure you have had the pneumonia
vaccine. If you were younger than 65 when
you had the pneumonia vaccine, you may
need another one. Ask your doctor.
■ Care for your teeth and gums. Brush
your teeth and floss daily. Have your
teeth and gums checked twice a year by a
dentist to avoid serious problems.
■ Protect your skin. Keep your skin
clean and use skin softeners for dryness.
Take care of minor cuts and bruises to
prevent infections.
■ Ask someone else to check your feet
if you can’t. If you have sores, blisters,
breaks in the skin, infections, or buildup of calluses, see a foot doctor, called a
podiatrist.
■ Keep up with cancer screenings.
Ask your doctor which screenings to get
based on your age, gender, and other
risk factors.
■ Talk with your doctor about your
concerns. If you think you might need
help with your management plan, are
depressed, are worried about your
memory, or have any other concerns,
talk with your doctor. There may be
ways to help.
At least once a year, your healthcare
team will assess how well you are managing
your diabetes. Your management plan
might need changes, or you may need
more information and support. A change
in health, such as a new diagnosis or
complication, or a change in care, such
as going home from the hospital, may
also lead to changes to your diabetes
management plan.

Be Prepared.
Make sure you always have at
least 3 days’ worth of supplies on
hand for testing and treating your
diabetes in case of an emergency.

A Good Night’s Sleep.
Ever since he retired, Edward dreads going to
bed at night. He’s afraid that when he turns
off his light, he will just lie there with his eyes
open and his mind racing. “How can I break
this cycle?” he asks. “I’m so tired, I need to
get some sleep.”
Just like Edward, you want a good night’s
rest. Getting enough sleep helps you stay
healthy and alert. But, many older people
don’t sleep well. If you’re always sleepy
or you find it hard to get enough sleep at
night, it may be time to see a doctor.
Waking up every day feeling tired is a sign
that you are not getting the rest you need.

Sleep and Aging.
Older adults need about the same
amount of sleep as all adults, 7 to 9 hours
each night. But, older people tend to go to
sleep earlier and get up earlier than they
did when they were younger.
There are many reasons why older
people may not get enough sleep at night.

Feeling sick or being in pain can make it hard
to sleep. Some medicines can keep you awake.
No matter the reason, if you don’t get a good
night’s sleep, the next day you may:
■ Be irritable
■ Have memory problems or be forgetful
■ Feel depressed
■ Have more falls or accidents

Get a Good Night’s Sleep
Being older doesn’t mean you have to be
tired all the time. You can do many things
to help you get a good night’s sleep. Here
are some ideas:
■ Follow a regular sleep schedule. Go to
sleep and get up at the same time each day,
even on weekends or when you are traveling.
■ Avoid napping in the late afternoon
or evening, if you can. Naps may keep you
awake at night.
■ Develop a bedtime routine. Take time
to relax before bedtime each night. Some
people read a book, listen to soothing
music, or soak in a warm bath.
■ Try not to watch television or use your
computer, cell phone, or tablet in the
bedroom. The light from these devices may
make it difficult for you to fall asleep. And
alarming or unsettling shows or movies, like
horror movies, may keep you awake.
■ Keep your bedroom at a comfortable
temperature, not too hot or too cold, and
as quiet as possible.
■ Use low lighting in the evenings and
as you prepare for bed.
■ Exercise at regular times each day
but not within 3 hours of your bedtime.
■ Avoid eating large meals close to
Bedtime, they can keep you awake.
■ Stay away from caffeine late in the
day. Caffeine (found in coffee, tea, soda,
and chocolate) can keep you awake.
■ Remember, alcohol won’t help you
sleep. Even small amounts make it harder
to stay asleep.

Insomnia Is Common in
Older Adults.
Insomnia is the most common sleep
problem in adults age 60 and older. People
with this condition have trouble falling
asleep and staying asleep. Insomnia can last
for days, months, and even years. Having
trouble sleeping can mean you:
■ Take a long time to fall asleep.
■ Wake up many times in the night.
■ Wake up early and are unable to get
back to sleep.
■ Wake up tired.
■ Feel very sleepy during the day.

Developing healthy habits at bedtime may
help you get a good night’s sleep.

Sleep Apnea.
People with sleep apnea have short
pauses in breathing while they are asleep.
These pauses may happen many times
during the night. If not treated, sleep apnea
can lead to other problems, such as high
blood pressure, stroke, or memory loss.
You can have sleep apnea and not even
know it. Feeling sleepy during the day and
being told you are snoring loudly at night
could be signs that you have sleep apnea.
If you think you have sleep apnea, see
a doctor who can treat this sleep problem.
You may need to learn to sleep in a
position that keeps your airways open.
Treatment using a continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP) device almost
always helps people with sleep apnea. A
dental device or surgery may also help.

Movement Disorders and Sleep.

Often, being unable to sleep becomes a
habit. Some people worry about not sleeping
even before they get into bed. This may make
it harder to fall asleep and stay asleep.
Some older adults who have trouble
sleeping may use over the counter sleep aids.
Others may use prescription medicines to
help them sleep. These medicines may help
when used for a short time. But remember,
medicines aren’t a cure for insomnia.

Restless legs syndrome, periodic limb
movement disorder, and rapid eye movement
sleep behavior disorder are common in
older adults. These movement disorders
can rob you of needed sleep.
People with restless legs syndrome, or
RLS, feel like there is tingling, crawling, or
pins and needles in one or both legs. This
feeling is worse at night. See your doctor
for more information about medicines to
treat RLS.


Periodic limb movement disorder, or
PLMD, causes people to jerk and kick their
legs every 20 to 40 seconds during sleep.
Medication, warm baths, exercise, and
relaxation exercises can help.
Rapid eye movement, or REM, sleep
behavior disorder is another condition that
may make it harder to get a good night’s
sleep. During normal REM sleep, your
muscles cannot move, so your body stays
still. But, if you have REM sleep behavior
disorder, your muscles can move and your
sleep is disrupted.

Alzheimer’s Disease and
Sleep: A Special Problem
Alzheimer’s disease often changes a
person’s sleeping habits. Some people with
Alzheimer’s disease sleep too much; others
don’t sleep enough. Some people wake up
many times during the night; others
wander or yell at night.
The person with Alzheimer’s disease
isn’t the only one who loses sleep. Caregivers
may have sleepless nights, leaving them tired
for the challenges they face.
If you’re caring for someone with
Alzheimer’s disease, take these steps to
make him or her safer and help you sleep
better at night:
■ Make sure the floor is clear of objects.
■ Lock up any medicines.
■ Attach grab bars in the bathroom.
■ Place a gate across the stairs.


Safe Sleep for Older Adults
Try to set up a safe and restful place to
sleep. Make sure you have smoke alarms on
each floor of your home. Before going to bed,
lock all windows and doors that lead outside.
Other ideas for a safe night’s sleep are:
■ Keep a telephone with emergency
phone numbers by your bed.
■ Have a lamp within reach that is easy
to turn on.
■ Put a glass of water next to the bed in
case you wake up thirsty.
■ Don’t smoke, especially in bed.
■ Remove area rugs so you won’t trip if
you get out of bed during the night.

Tips to Help You Fall Asleep
You may have heard about some tricks
to help you fall asleep. You don’t really have
to count sheep, you could try counting slowly
to 100. Some people find that playing mental
games makes them sleepy. For example, tell
yourself it is 5 minutes before you have to get
up, and you’re just trying to get a little bit
more sleep.
Some people find that relaxing their
bodies puts them to sleep. One way to do
this is to imagine your toes are completely
relaxed, then your feet, and then your
ankles are completely relaxed. Work your
way up the rest of your body, section by
section. You may drift off to sleep before
getting to the top of your head.
Use your bedroom only for sleeping.
After turning off the light, give yourself
about 20 minutes to fall asleep. If you’re
still awake and not drowsy, get out of bed.
When you feel sleepy, go back to bed.
If you feel tired and unable to do your
activities for more than 2 or 3 weeks, you
may have a sleep problem. Talk with your
doctor about changes you can make to get
a better night’s sleep. Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s Disease 
Get the Facts
■ Changes in the Brain.
■ Signs and Symptoms.
■ What Causes Alzheimer’s?
■ Diagnosis.
■ Treatment.
■ Participating in Clinical Trials.
■ Support for Families and Caregivers.
■ For More Information.

Alzheimer’s disease is an
irreversible, progressive brain
disorder that slowly destroys
memory and thinking skills and,
eventually, the ability to carry out the
simplest tasks. In most people with
Alzheimer’s, symptoms first appear
in their mid 60s. Estimates vary, but
experts suggest that more than 5.5
million Americans, most of them age
65 or older, may have dementia
caused by Alzheimer’s.
Alzheimer’s disease is currently
ranked as the sixth leading cause of
death in the United States, but recent
estimates indicate that the disorder
may rank third, just behind heart
disease and cancer, as a cause of death
for older people.
Alzheimer’s is the most common
cause of dementia among older
adults. Dementia is the loss of
cognitive functioning, thinking,
remembering, and reasoning and
behavioral abilities to such an extent
that it interferes with a person’s
daily life and activities. Dementia
ranges in severity from the mildest
stage, when it is just beginning to
affect a person’s functioning, to the
most severe stage, when the person
must depend completely on others
for basic activities of daily living.
The causes of dementia can vary,
depending on the types of brain
changes that may be taking place.
Other dementias include Lewy body
dementia, frontotemporal disorders,
and vascular dementia. It is common
for people to have mixed dementia, 
a combination of two or more types of
dementia. For example, some people
have both Alzheimer’s disease and
vascular dementia.
Alzheimer’s disease is named after Dr.
Alois Alzheimer. In 1906, Dr. Alzheimer
noticed changes in the brain tissue of a
woman who had died of an unusual
mental illness. Her symptoms included
memory loss, language problems, and
unpredictable behavior. After she died, he
examined her brain and found many
abnormal clumps (now called amyloid
plaques) and tangled bundles of fibers (now
called neurofibrillary, or tau, tangles).

These plaques and tangles in the brain
are still considered some of the main
features of Alzheimer’s disease. Another
feature is the loss of connections
between nerve cells (neurons) in the
brain. Neurons transmit messages
between different parts of the brain,
and from the brain to muscles and
organs in the body.

Changes in the Brain.
Scientists continue to unravel the
complex brain changes involved in the
onset and progression of Alzheimer’s
disease. Changes in the brain may
begin a decade or more before memory
and other cognitive problems appear.
During this preclinical stage of
Alzheimer’s disease, people seem to be
Symptom free, but toxic changes are
taking place in the brain. Abnormal
deposits of proteins form amyloid
plaques and tau tangles throughout
the brain. Once healthy neurons stop
functioning, lose connections with
other neurons, and die. Many other
complex brain changes are thought to
play a role in Alzheimer’s, too.


The damage initially appears to take
place in the hippocampus and the
entorhinal cortex, parts of the brain
essential in forming memories. As more
neurons die, additional parts of the
brain are affected and begin to shrink.
By the final stage of Alzheimer’s,
damage is widespread, and brain
volume has shrunk significantly.

Signs and Symptoms.
Memory problems are typically one of
the first signs of cognitive impairment
related to Alzheimer’s disease. Some
people with memory problems have a
condition called mild cognitive impairment (MCI). In MCI, people have more
memory problems than normal for their
age, but their symptoms do not interfere
with their everyday lives. Movement
difficulties and problems with the sense
of smell have also been linked to MCI.
Older people with MCI are at greater
risk for developing Alzheimer’s, but not
all of them do. Some may even go back
to normal cognition.

The first symptoms of Alzheimer’s vary
from person to person. For many, decline
in non-memory aspects of cognition, such
as word finding, vision/spatial issues, and
impaired reasoning or judgment, may
signal the very early stages of Alzheimer’s
disease. Researchers are studying
biomarkers (biological signs of disease
found in brain images, cerebrospinal
fluid, and blood) to detect early changes
in the brains of people with MCI and in
cognitively normal people who may be at
greater risk for Alzheimer’s disease.
Studies indicate that such early detection
is possible, but more research is needed
before these techniques can be used routinely to diagnose Alzheimer’s disease in
everyday medical practice.

Mild Alzheimer’s Disease.
As Alzheimer’s disease progresses,
people experience greater memory loss
and other cognitive difficulties. Problems
can include wandering and getting lost,
trouble handling money and paying
bills, repeating questions, taking longer
to complete normal daily tasks, and
personality and behavior changes.
People are often diagnosed at this stage.

Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease.
In this stage, damage occurs in areas of
the brain that control language, reasoning, sensory processing, and conscious
thought. Memory loss and confusion
grow worse, and people begin to have
problems recognizing family and friends.
They may be unable to learn new things,
carry out multistep tasks such as getting
dressed, or cope with new situations. In
addition, people at this stage may have
hallucinations, delusions, and paranoia
and may behave impulsively.

Severe Alzheimer’s Disease.
Ultimately, plaques and tangles spread
throughout the brain, and brain tissue
shrinks significantly. People with severe
Alzheimer’s cannot communicate and
are completely dependent on others for
their care. Near the end, the person may
be in bed most or all of the time as the
body shuts down.

What Causes Alzheimer’s?
Scientists don’t yet fully understand
what causes Alzheimer’s disease in most
people. In people with early onset
Alzheimer’s, a genetic mutation may be
the cause. Late onset Alzheimer’s arises
from a complex series of brain changes
that occur over decades. The causes
probably include a combination of
genetic, environmental, and lifestyle
factors. The importance of any one of
these factors in increasing or decreasing
the risk of developing Alzheimer’s may
differ from person to person.

The Basics of Alzheimer’s.
Scientists are conducting studies to learn
more about plaques, tangles, and other
biological features of Alzheimer’s disease.
Advances in brain imaging techniques
allow researchers to see the development
and spread of abnormal amyloid and
tau proteins in the living brain, as well
as changes in brain structure and
function. Scientists are also exploring
the very earliest steps in the disease
process by studying changes in the brain
and body fluids that can be detected
years before Alzheimer’s symptoms
appear. Findings from these studies will
help in understanding the causes of
Alzheimer’s and make diagnosis easier.

One of the great mysteries of Alzheimer’s
disease is why it largely strikes older
adults. Research on normal brain aging
is exploring this question. For example,
scientists are learning how age related
changes in the brain may harm neurons
and affect other types of brain cells to
contribute to Alzheimer’s damage. These
age related changes include atrophy
(shrinking) of certain parts of the brain,
inflammation, vascular damage,
production of unstable molecules called
free radicals, and mitochondrial
dysfunction (a breakdown of energy
production within a cell).

Genetics.
Most people with Alzheimer’s have the
late onset form of the disease, in which
symptoms become apparent in their
mid 60s. Researchers have not found a
specific gene that directly causes late onset Alzheimer’s. However, having one
form of the apolipoprotein E (APOE)
gene does increase a person’s risk. This
gene has several forms. One of them,
APOE, increases a person’s risk of
developing the disease and is also
associated with an earlier age of disease
onset. However, carrying the APOE
form of the gene does not mean that a
person will definitely develop Alzheimer’s
disease, and some people with no APOE
may also develop the disease.

Also, scientists have identified a number
of regions of interest in the genome (an
organism’s complete set of DNA) that
may increase a person’s risk for lateonset Alzheimer’s to varying degrees.

Early onset Alzheimer’s disease occurs
between a person’s 30s and mid 60s and
represents less than 10 percent of all
people with Alzheimer’s. Some cases are
caused by an inherited change in one of
three genes, resulting in a type known
as early onset familial Alzheimer’s
disease, or FAD. For others, research
suggests there may be a genetic component related to factors other than these
three genes.

Most people with Down syndrome
develop Alzheimer’s. This may be
because people with Down syndrome
have an extra copy of chromosome 21,
which contains the gene that generates
harmful amyloid.

Health, Environmental, and
Lifestyle Factors
Research suggests that a host of factors
beyond genetics may play a role in the
development and course of Alzheimer’s
disease. There is a great deal of interest,
for example, in the relationship between
cognitive decline and vascular conditions
such as heart disease, stroke, and high
blood pressure, as well as metabolic
conditions such as diabetes and obesity.
Ongoing research will help us understand
whether and how reducing risk factors
for these conditions may also reduce the
risk of Alzheimer’s.

A nutritious diet, physical activity, social
engagement, and mentally stimulating
pursuits have all been associated with
helping people stay healthy as they
age. These factors might also help reduce
the risk of cognitive decline and
Alzheimer’s disease. Clinical trials are
testing some of these possibilities.

Diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
Disease
Doctors use several methods and tools to
help determine whether a person who is
having memory problems has “possible
Alzheimer’s dementia” (dementia may
be due to another cause) or “probable
Alzheimer’s dementia” (no other cause
for dementia can be found).

To diagnose Alzheimer’s, doctors may:
■ Ask the person and a family member or 
friend questions about overall
health, use of prescription and over the counter
medicines, diet, past medical problems,
ability to carry out daily activities, and
changes in behavior and personality.
■ Conduct tests of memory, problem solving,
attention, counting and language.
■ Carry out standard medical tests,
such as blood and urine tests, to 
identify other possible causes of
the problem.
■ Perform brain scans, such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), or positron
emission tomography (PET), to rule
out other possible causes for
symptoms.

These tests may be repeated to give
doctors information about how the
person’s memory and other cognitive
functions are changing over time.

Alzheimer’s disease can be definitively
diagnosed only after death, by linking
clinical measures with an examination
of brain tissue in an autopsy.

People with memory and thinking
concerns should talk to their doctor to
find out whether their symptoms are due
to Alzheimer’s or another cause, such as
stroke, tumor, Parkinson’s disease, sleep
disturbances, side effects of medication,
an infection, or a non-Alzheimer’s
dementia. Some of these conditions may
be treatable and possibly reversible.

If the diagnosis is Alzheimer’s, beginning
treatment early in the disease process
may help preserve daily functioning for
some time, even though the underlying
disease process cannot be stopped or
reversed. An early diagnosis also helps
families plan for the future. They can
take care of financial and legal matters,
address potential safety issues, learn
about living arrangements, and develop
support networks.

In addition, an early diagnosis gives
people greater opportunities to participate in clinical 
trials that are testing
possible new treatments for Alzheimer’s
disease or other research studies.

Treatment of Alzheimer’s Disease

Alzheimer’s disease is complex, and it
is unlikely that any one drug or other
intervention will successfully treat it.
Current approaches focus on helping
people maintain mental function,
manage behavioral symptoms, and
slow or delay the symptoms of disease.

Researchers hope to develop therapies
targeting specific genetic, molecular,
and cellular mechanisms so that the
actual underlying cause of the disease
can be stopped or prevented.

Participating in Clinical Trials
Everybody, those with Alzheimer’s disease or mild cognitive impairment as well as
healthy volunteers with or without a family history of Alzheimer’s, may be able to
take part in clinical trials and studies. Participants in Alzheimer’s clinical research
help scientists learn how the brain changes in healthy aging and in Alzheimer’s.
Currently, at least 270,000 volunteers are needed to participate in about 200 active
clinical trials and studies that are testing ways to understand, diagnose, treat, and
prevent Alzheimer’s disease.
Volunteering for a clinical trial is one way to help in the fight against Alzheimer’s
disease. Studies need participants of different ages, sexes, races, and ethnicities
to ensure that results are meaningful for many people.
The National Institute on Aging (NIA) at the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
leads the Federal Government’s research efforts on Alzheimer’s. NIA supported
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers throughout the United States conduct a wide
range of research, including studies of the causes, diagnosis, and management of
Alzheimer’s. NIA also sponsors the Alzheimer’s Clinical Trials Consortium, which
is designed to accelerate and expand studies and therapies in Alzheimer’s and
related dementias.
To find out more about Alzheimer’s and related dementias clinical trials and studies:
■ Talk to your health care provider about local studies that may be right for you.
■ Contact Alzheimer’s disease centers or memory or neurology clinics in your
community.
■ Search the NIA Clinical Trials Finder for a trial near you or to sign up
for email alerts about new trials: www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/clinical-trials.
■ Sign up for a registry (such as the Alzheimer’s Prevention Registry) or matching
service (such as TrialMatch) to be invited to participate in studies.

Maintaining Mental Function
Several medications are approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
to treat symptoms of Alzheimer’s.
Donepezil (Aricept®), rivastigmine
(Exelon®), and galantamine (Razadyne®)
are used to treat mild to moderate
Alzheimer’s (donepezil can be used for
severe Alzheimer’s as well). Memantine
(Namenda®), the Exelon® patch, and
Namzaric® (a combination of memantine
and donepezil) are used to treat moderate
to severe Alzheimer’s. These drugs
work by regulating neurotransmitters,
the brain chemicals that transmit
messages between neurons. They may
help maintain thinking, memory, and
communication skills, and help with
certain behavioral problems. However,
these drugs don’t change the underlying
disease process. They are effective for
some but not all people and may help
only for a limited time.


Managing Behavior.
Common behavioral symptoms of
Alzheimer’s include sleeplessness,
wandering, agitation, anxiety, and
aggression. Scientists are learning why
these symptoms occur and are studying
new treatments, drug and nondrug, 
to manage them. Research has shown
that treating behavioral symptoms can
make people with Alzheimer’s more
comfortable and makes things easier
for caregivers.

Looking for New Treatments.
Alzheimer’s research has developed to a
point where scientists are exploring ways
to delay or prevent the disease as well as
treat its symptoms. In ongoing clinical
trials supported by NIA, scientists are
developing and testing several possible
interventions. Under study are drug
therapies aimed at a variety of targets,
including the beta-amyloid protein,
cerebrovascular function, loss of
synapses, and specific neurotransmitters,
as well as nondrug interventions, such as
physical activity, diet, cognitive training,
and combinations of these approaches.

Support for Families
and Caregivers.
Caring for a person with Alzheimer’s
disease can have high physical,
emotional, and financial costs. The
demands of day to day care, changes
in family roles, and decisions about
placement in a care facility can be
difficult. There are several evidence based approaches and programs that
can help, and researchers are
continuing to look for new and better
ways to support caregivers.

Becoming well informed about the
disease is one important strategy.
Programs that teach families about the
various stages of Alzheimer’s and about
ways to deal with difficult behaviors and
other caregiving challenges can help.

Good coping skills, a strong support
network, and respite care are other
ways that help caregivers handle the
stress of caring for a loved one with
Alzheimer’s disease. For example,
staying physically active provides
physical and emotional benefits.

Some caregivers have found that
joining a support group is a critical
lifeline. These support groups allow
caregivers to find respite, express
concerns, share experiences, get tips,
and receive emotional comfort. Many
organizations sponsor in person and
online support groups, including
groups for people with early stage
Alzheimer’s and their families.
care, education and training, and
research related to Alzheimer’s disease
and other dementias. Staff members
answer telephone, email, and written
requests and make referrals to local and
national resources. Biomarkers for Dementia
Detection and Research
Biomarkers for Dementia
■ Get the Facts.
Types of Biomarkers and Tests.
■ Brain Imaging.
■ Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers.
■ Other Types.
Use in Diagnosis.
Use in Research.
The Future of Biomarkers.
How You Can Help.
For More Information.

Biomarkers are measures of
what is happening inside the
living body, shown by the
results of laboratory and imaging
tests. Biomarkers can help doctors
and scientists diagnose diseases and
health conditions, find health risks
in a person, monitor responses to
treatment, and see how a person’s
disease or health condition changes
over time. For example, an increased
level of cholesterol in the blood is a
biomarker for heart attack risk.
Many types of biomarker tests are
used for research on Alzheimer’s
disease and related dementias.
Changes in the brains of people with
these disorders may begin many
years before memory loss or other
symptoms appear. Researchers use
biomarkers to help detect these brain
changes in people, who may or may
not have obvious changes in memory
or thinking. Finding these changes
early in the disease process helps identify
people who are at the greatest risk
of Alzheimer’s or another dementia
and may help determine which people
might benefit most from a particular
treatment.

Use of biomarkers in clinical settings,
such as a doctor’s office, is limited
at present. Some biomarkers may
be used to identify or rule out
causes of symptoms for some people.
Researchers are studying many types
of biomarkers that may one day be
used more widely in doctors’ offices
and other clinical settings.

Types of Biomarkers
and Tests.
In Alzheimer’s disease and related
dementias, the most widely used
biomarkers measure changes in the
size and function of the brain and
its parts, as well as levels of certain
proteins seen on brain scans and in
cerebrospinal fluid and blood.

Brain Imaging.
Brain imaging, also called brain scans,
can measure changes in the size of the
brain, identify and measure specific brain
regions, and detect biochemical changes
and vascular damage (damage related to
blood vessels). In clinical settings, doctors
can use brain scans to find evidence of
brain disorders, such as tumors or stroke,
that may aid in diagnosis. In research
settings, brain imaging is used to study
structural and biochemical changes in the
brain in Alzheimer’s disease and related
dementias. There are several types
of brain scans.

Computerized Tomography.
What is it?
A computerized tomography (CT) scan
is a type of x ray that uses radiation to
produce images of the brain. A CT can
show the size of the brain and identify
a tumor, stroke, head injury, or other
potential cause of dementia symptoms.
CT scans provide greater detail than
traditional x rays, but a less detailed
picture than magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) and cannot easily measure changes
over time. Sometimes a CT scan is used
when a person can’t get MRI due to metal
in their body, such as a pacemaker.

What’s the procedure like?
During a CT scan, a person lies in a
scanner for 10 to 20 minutes. A donutshaped device moves around the head
to produce the image.

What does it show?
A head CT can show shrinkage of brain
regions that may occur in dementia, as
well as signs of a stroke or tumor.

When is it used?
A CT is sometimes used to help a doctor
diagnose dementia based on changes
in the size of particular brain regions,
compared either to an earlier scan or to
what would be expected for a person of
the same age and size. It is rarely used in
the research arena to study Alzheimer’s
disease and related dementias.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
What is it?
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
uses magnetic fields and radio waves
to produce detailed images of body
structures, including the size and shape
of the brain and brain regions. MRI
may be able to identify some causes of
dementia symptoms, such as a tumor,
stroke, or head injury. MRI may also
show whether areas of the brain have
atrophied, or shrunk.

What’s the procedure like?
During an MRI, a person lies still in
a tunnel shaped scanner for about 30
minutes for diagnostic purposes and up
to 2 hours for research purposes. MRI is
a safe, painless procedure that does not
involve radioactivity. The procedure is
noisy, so people are often given earplugs
or headphones to wear. Some people
become claustrophobic and anxious inside
an MRI machine, which can be addressed
with anxiety relieving medication taken
shortly before the scan.

Because MRI uses strong magnetic fields
to obtain images, people with certain
types of metal in their bodies, such as a
pacemaker, surgical clips, or shrapnel,
cannot undergo the procedure.

What does it show?
MRI scans provide pictures of brain
structures and whether abnormal
changes, such as shrinkage of areas of the
brain, are present. Evidence of shrinkage
may support a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s
or another neurodegenerative dementia
but cannot indicate a specific diagnosis.
Researchers use different types of MRI
scans to obtain pictures of brain structure,
chemistry, blood flow, and function, as
well as the size of brain regions. MRI
also provides a detailed picture of any
vascular damage in the brain, such as
damage due to a stroke or small areas of
bleeding, that may contribute to changes
in cognition. Repeat scans can show how
a person’s brain changes over time.

When is it used?
Doctors often use MRI scans to identify
or rule out causes of memory loss, such
as a stroke or other vascular brain injury,
tumors, or hydrocephalus. These scans
also can be used to assess brain shrinkage.

In the research arena, various types
of MRI scans are used to study the
structure and function of the brain in
aging and Alzheimer’s disease. In clinical
trials, MRI can be used to monitor the
safety of novel drugs and to examine how
treatment may affect the brain over time.

Positron Emission Tomography
What is it?
Positron emission tomography (PET)
uses small amounts of a radioactive
substance, called a tracer, to measure
specific activity, such as glucose (energy)
use, in different brain regions. Different
PET scans use different tracers. PET is
commonly used in dementia research but
less frequently in clinical settings.

What’s the procedure like?
The person having a PET scan receives
an injection of a radioactive tracer into a
vein in the arm, then lies on a cushioned
table, which is moved into a donut shaped
scanner. The PET scanner takes pictures
of the brain, revealing regions of normal
and abnormal chemical activity. A PET
scan is much quieter than MRI. The
entire process, including the injection
and scan, takes about 1 hour.
The amount of radiation exposure
during a PET scan is relatively low.
People who are concerned about
radiation exposure or who have had
many x rays or imaging scans should
talk with their doctor.

What does it show?
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scans
measure glucose use in the brain.
Glucose, a type of sugar, is the primary
source of energy for cells. Studies show
that people with dementia often have
abnormal patterns of decreased glucose
use in specific areas of the brain. An
FDG PET scan can show a pattern that
may support a diagnosis of a specific
cause of dementia.

Medical Imaging App
Learn more about different types
of imaging, including CT, MRI, and
PET scans, with the Understanding
Medical Exams app from the National
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering. 

Amyloid PET scans measure abnormal
deposits of a protein called beta-amyloid.
Higher levels of beta-amyloid are consistent with the presence of amyloid plaques,
a hallmark of Alzheimer’s disease. Several
tracers may be used for amyloid PET
scans, including florbetapir, flutemetamol,
florbetaben, and Pittsburgh compound B.

Tau PET scans detect abnormal
accumulation of a protein, tau, which
forms tangles in nerve cells in Alzheimer’s
disease and many other dementias.
Several tau tracers, such as AV-1451,
PI-2620, and MK-6240, are being
studied in clinical trials and other
research settings.

When is it used?
In clinical care, FDG PET scans may
be used if a doctor strongly suspects
frontotemporal dementia as opposed
to Alzheimer’s dementia based on the
person’s symptoms, or when there is an
unusual presentation of symptoms.

Amyloid PET imaging is sometimes
used by medical specialists to help with
a diagnosis when Alzheimer’s disease
is suspected but uncertain, even after
a thorough evaluation. Amyloid PET
imaging may also help with a diagnosis
when people with dementia have unusual
or very mild symptoms, an early age of
onset (under age 65), or any of several
different conditions, such as severe
depression, that may contribute to
dementia symptoms. A negative amyloid
PET scan rules out Alzheimer’s disease.

In research, amyloid and tau PET scans
are used to determine which individuals
may be at greatest risk for developing
Alzheimer’s disease, to identify clinical
trial participants, and to assess the
impact of experimental drugs designed
to affect amyloid or tau pathways.

Cerebrospinal Fluid Biomarkers
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is a clear
fluid that surrounds the brain and
spinal cord, providing protection and
insulation. CSF also supplies numerous
nutrients and chemicals that help keep
brain cells healthy. Proteins and other
substances made by cells can be detected
in CSF, and their levels may change
years before symptoms of Alzheimer’s
and other brain disorders appear.

Lumbar Puncture
What is it?
CSF is obtained by a lumbar puncture,
also called a spinal tap, an outpatient
procedure used to diagnose several types
of neurological problems.

What’s the procedure like?
People either sit or lie curled up on their
side while the skin over the lower part
of the spine is cleaned and injected with
a local anesthetic. A very thin needle is
then inserted into the space between the
bones of the spine. CSF either drips out
through the needle or is gently drawn out
through a syringe. The entire procedure
typically takes 30 to 60 minutes.
After the procedure, the person lies
down for a few minutes and may receive
something to eat or drink. People can
drive themselves home and resume
regular activities, but they should
refrain from strenuous exercise for
about 24 hours.

Some people feel brief pain during
the procedure, but most have little
discomfort. A few may have a mild
headache afterward, which usually
disappears after taking a pain reliever
and lying down. Sometimes, people
develop a persistent headache that gets
worse when they sit or stand. This type
of headache can be treated with a blood
patch, which involves injecting a small
amount of the person’s blood into his or
her lower back to stop a leak of CSF.

Certain people cannot have a lumbar
puncture, including people who take
medication such as warfarin (Coumadin,
Jantoven) to thin their blood, have a low
platelet count or an infection in the lower
back, or have had major back surgery.

What does it show?
The most widely used CSF biomarkers
for Alzheimer’s disease measure certain
proteins: beta-amyloid 42 (the major
component of amyloid plaques in the
brain), tau, and phospho-tau (major
components of tau tangles in the brain).
In Alzheimer’s disease, beta-amyloid
42 levels in CSF are low, and tau and
phospho-tau levels are high, compared
with levels in people without Alzheimer’s
or other causes of dementia.

When is it used?
In clinical practice, CSF biomarkers may
be used to help diagnose Alzheimer’s, for
example, in cases involving an unusual
presentation of symptoms or course of
progression. CSF also can be used to
evaluate people with unusual types of
dementia or with rapidly progressive
dementia.

In research, CSF biomarkers are
valuable tools for early detection of a
neurodegenerative disease. They are
also used in clinical trials to assess the
impact of experimental medications.

Other Types of Biomarkers
Blood Tests
Proteins that originate in the brain,
such as tau and beta-amyloid 42, may
be measured with sensitive blood tests.
Levels of these proteins may change
as a result of Alzheimer’s, a stroke,
or other brain disorders. These blood
biomarkers are less accurate than CSF
biomarkers for identifying Alzheimer’s
and related dementias. However, new
methods to measure these brain derived
proteins, particularly beta-amyloid 42,
have improved, suggesting that blood
tests may be used in the future for
screening and perhaps diagnosis.

Many other proteins, lipids, and other
substances can be measured in the
blood, but so far none has shown value
in diagnosing Alzheimer’s.
Currently, dementia researchers use
blood biomarkers to study early detection,
prevention, and the effects of potential
treatments. They are not used in doctors’
offices and other clinical settings.

Genetic Testing
Genes are structures in a body’s cells
that are passed down from a person’s
birth parents. They carry information
that determines a person’s traits and
keep the body’s cells healthy. Problems
with genes can cause diseases like
Alzheimer’s.

A genetic test is a type of medical test
that analyzes DNA from blood or saliva
to determine a person’s genetic makeup.
A number of genetic combinations may
change the risk of developing a disease
that causes dementia.

Genetic tests are not routinely used in
clinical settings to diagnose or predict
the risk of developing Alzheimer’s or a
related dementia. However, a neurologist
or other medical specialist may order a
genetic test in rare situations, such as
when a person has an early age of onset
or a strong family history of Alzheimer’s
or a related brain disease. A genetic
test is typically accompanied by genetic
counseling for the person before the test
and when results are received. Genetic
counseling includes a discussion of the
risks, benefits, and limitations of test
results.

Genetic testing for APOE, the
main genetic risk factor for late onset
Alzheimer’s disease, is available as
a direct to consumer or commercial
test. It is important to understand
that genetic testing provides only one
piece of information about a person’s
risk. Other genetic and environmental
factors, lifestyle choices, and family
medical history also affect a person’s
risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease.

In research studies, genetic tests
may be used, in addition to other
assessments, to predict disease risk,
help study early detection, explain
disease progression, and study whether
a person’s genetic makeup influences
the effects of a treatment.

Biomarkers in Development
Researchers are studying other biomarker
tests for possible use in diagnosing and
tracking Alzheimer’s disease and other
types of dementia. These biomarkers
include reduced ability to smell, the
presence of certain proteins in the retina
of the eye, and other proteins that indicate
the health of neurons. At this point,
doctors do not use these biomarkers to
diagnose dementia.

Biomarkers in Dementia
Diagnosis
Some biomarkers may be part of a
diagnostic assessment for people
with symptoms of Alzheimer’s or a
related dementia. Other parts of the
assessment typically include a medical
history; physical exam; laboratory tests;
neurological tests of balance, vision,
and other cognitive functions; and
neuropsychological tests of memory,
problem solving, language skills, and
other mental functions.

Different biomarkers provide different
types of information about the brain
and may be used in combination with
each other and with other clinical tests
to improve the accuracy of diagnosis, 
for example, in cases where the age of
onset or progression of symptoms is
not typical for Alzheimer’s or a related
brain disorder.

Physicians with expertise in Alzheimer’s
disease and related dementias are
the most appropriate clinicians to
order biomarker tests and interpret
the results. These physicians include
neurologists, geriatric psychiatrists,
neuropsychologists, and geriatricians.

Currently, Medicare and other health
insurance plans cover only certain,
limited types of biomarker tests for
dementia symptoms, and their use
must be justified based on the person’s
symptoms and specific criteria.

Biomarkers in Dementia
Research
Research on biomarkers for Alzheimer’s
disease and other dementias has shown
rapid progress. Biomarkers provide
detailed measures of abnormal changes
in the brain, which can aid in early
detection of possible disease in people
with very mild or unusual symptoms.
People with Alzheimer’s disease and
related dementias progress at different
rates, and biomarkers may help predict
and monitor their progression.

In addition, biomarker measures may
help researchers:
■ better understand how risk factors
and genetic variants are involved in
Alzheimer’s disease.
■ identify participants who meet
particular requirements, such as
having certain genes or amyloid.
levels, for clinical trials and studies
■ track study participants’ responses
to a test drug or other intervention,
such as physical exercise.

The Future of Biomarkers
Advances in biomarkers during the
past decade have led to exciting new
findings. Researchers can now see
Alzheimer’s related changes in the
brain while people are alive, track the
disease’s onset and progression, and
test the effectiveness of promising
drugs and other potential treatments.
To build on these successes, researchers
hope to further biomarker research by:
■ developing and validating a full range
of biomarkers, particularly those
that are less expensive and/or less
invasive, to help test drugs that may
prevent, treat, and improve diagnosis
of Alzheimer’s and related dementias.
■ advancing the use of novel PET
imaging, CSF, and blood biomarkers
to identify specific changes in the
brain related to Alzheimer’s and
other neurodegenerative dementias.
■ using new MRI methods to measure
brain structure, function, and
connections.
■ developing and refining sensitive
clinical and neuropsychological
assessments to help detect and track
early stage disease.
■ using biomarkers in combination to
build a model of Alzheimer’s disease
progression over decades, from
its earliest, presymptomatic stage
through dementia.

How You Can Help.
The use of biomarkers is allowing scientists to make great strides in identifying
potential new treatments and ways to prevent or delay dementia. These advances
are possible because thousands of people have participated in clinical trials and
studies. Clinical trials need participants of all different ages, sexes, races, and
ethnicities to ensure that study results apply to as many people as possible, and
that treatments will be safe and effective for everyone who will use them. Major
medical breakthroughs could not happen without the generosity of research
participants who become partners in these scientific discoveries.
Smoking: It’s Never
Too Late to Stop.

Research supported by the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), the
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), and the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) confirms
that even if you’re 60 or older and
have been smoking for decades,
quitting will improve your health.

“I’ve smoked two packs of cigarettes a day for
40 years, what’s the use of quitting now?
Will I even be able to quit after all this time?”

It doesn’t matter how old you are or
how long you’ve been smoking, quitting
smoking at any time improves your
health. When you quit, you are likely to
add years to your life, breathe more easily,
have more energy, and save money. You
will also:

■ Lower your risk of cancer, heart
attack, stroke, and lung disease.
■ Have better blood circulation.
■ Improve your sense of taste and smell.
■ Stop smelling like smoke.
■ Set a healthy example for your
children and grandchildren.

Smoking shortens your life. It causes
about 1 of every 5 deaths in the United
States each year. Smoking makes
millions of Americans sick by causing:
■ Lung disease. Smoking damages
your lungs and airways, sometimes
causing chronic bronchitis. It can also
cause emphysema, which destroys your
lungs, making it very hard for you to
breathe.
■ Heart disease. Smoking increases
your risk of heart attack and stroke.
■ Cancer. Smoking can lead to
cancer of the lungs, mouth, larynx
(voice box), esophagus, stomach, liver,
pancreas, kidneys, bladder, and cervix.
■ Respiratory problems. If you
smoke, you are more likely than a
non-smoker to get the flu, pneumonia,
or other infections that can interfere
with your breathing.
■ Osteoporosis. If you smoke, your
chance of developing osteoporosis
(weak bones) is greater.
■ Eye diseases. Smoking increases
the risk of eye diseases that can lead
to vision loss and blindness, including
cataracts and age related macular
degeneration (AMD).
■ Diabetes. Smokers are more
likely to develop type 2 diabetes than
non-smokers, and smoking makes it
harder to control diabetes once you have
it. Diabetes is a serious disease that can
lead to blindness, heart disease, nerve
disease, kidney failure, and amputations.
Smoking can also make muscles tire
easily, make wounds harder to heal,
increase the risk of erectile dysfunction
in men, and make skin become dull
and wrinkled.

Nicotine Is a Drug.
Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that
makes cigarettes so addictive. Although
some people who give up smoking have
no withdrawal symptoms, many people
continue to have strong cravings for
cigarettes. They also may feel grumpy,
hungry, or tired. Some people have
headaches, feel depressed, or have
problems sleeping or concentrating.
These symptoms fade over time.

Help with Quitting.
Many people say the first step to
quitting smoking successfully is to
make a firm decision to quit and pick
a definite date to stop. Make a plan
to deal with the situations that trigger
your urge to smoke and to cope with
cravings. You may need to try many
approaches to find what works best for
you. For example, you might:
■ Talk with your doctor.
■ Read self-help information.
■ Go to individual or group counseling.
■ Download the mobile apps or sign
up for the text messaging service at
https://60plus.smokefree.gov/resources/mobile-tools.
■ Ask a friend for help.
■ Think of what you can do with the
money you spend on cigarettes and set
up a rewards system.
■ Take a walk or try a new physical
activity you enjoy.
■ Take medicine to help with
symptoms of nicotine withdrawal.
Some people worry about gaining
weight if they quit. If that concerns
you, make a plan to exercise and be
physically active when you quit, it may
distract you from your cravings and is
important for healthy aging.

Breaking the Addiction.
When you quit smoking, you may
need support to cope with your body’s
desire for nicotine. Nicotine replacement
products help some smokers quit. You
can buy gum, patches, or lozenges over
the counter.
There are also prescription
medications that may help you quit.
A nicotine nasal spray or inhaler can
reduce withdrawal symptoms and make
it easier for you to quit smoking.
Other drugs may also help with
withdrawal symptoms. Talk with your
doctor about which medicines might be
best for you.

Cigars, Pipes, Hookahs, Chewing
Tobacco, and Snuff Are Not Safe
Some people think smokeless
tobacco (chewing tobacco and snuff),
pipes, and cigars are safe alternatives
to cigarettes. They are not. Smokeless
tobacco causes cancer of the mouth and
pancreas. It also causes precancerous
lesions (known as oral leukoplakia), gum
problems, and nicotine addiction. Pipe
and cigar smokers may develop cancer
of the mouth, lip, larynx, esophagus,
and bladder. Those who inhale when
smoking are also at increased risk of
getting lung cancer as well as heart
disease, chronic bronchitis, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and
emphysema. Using a hookah to smoke
tobacco poses many of the same health
risks as cigarette smoking.

Secondhand Smoke Is
Dangerous
Secondhand smoke created by
cigarettes, cigars, and pipes can cause
serious health problems for family,
friends, and even pets of smokers.
Secondhand smoke is especially
dangerous for people who already
have lung or heart disease. In adults,
secondhand smoke can cause heart
disease and lung cancer. In babies, it
can increase the risk of sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS), which is the
unexplained death of a baby younger
than 1 year of age. Children are also
more likely to have lung problems, ear
infections, and severe asthma if they
are around secondhand smoke.

Get the Facts About
E-Cigarettes.
Electronic cigarettes, or e-cigarettes,
deliver nicotine, flavor, and other
chemicals that are inhaled by the
user. They are sometimes called
“e-cigs,” “e-hookahs,” “mods,”
“vape pens,” “vapes,” or “tank
systems,” and may look like regular
cigarettes, pens, or even USB sticks.
They may contain harmful substances
like lead and cancer causing
chemicals, in addition to nicotine,
which is addictive. Some flavorings in
e-cigarettes have been linked to lung
disease. Scientists are still studying the
long term effects e-cigarettes may
have on your health. The U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has
not approved e-cigarettes as a quitsmoking aid. There is limited evidence
that they help smokers quit.

Good News About Quitting
The good news is that after you
quit smoking, even in your 60s, 70s,
or beyond:
■ Your heart rate and blood pressure
drop to more normal levels.
■ Your nerve endings begin to
regenerate, so you can smell and taste
better.
■ Your lungs, heart, and circulatory
system will begin to function better.
■ You will cough and feel out of
breath less often.
■ Your chance of having a heart
attack or stroke will drop.
■ Your breathing will improve.
■ Your chance of getting cancer will
be lower.
No matter how old you are, all these
health benefits are important reasons to
make a plan to stop smoking.

Call a Smoking Quitline.
A trained counselor can help you
stop smoking or stay on track. 

You Can Quit Smoking:
Stick with It!
Many people need a few tries before
they quit smoking for good. If you slip
and have a cigarette, you are not a failure.
You can try again and be successful.
It’s never too late to get benefits
from quitting smoking. Quitting, even
in later life, can significantly lower your
risk of heart disease, stroke, and cancer
over time and reduce your risk of death.

