Understanding
Memory Loss
What to do when you
have trouble remembering
From the National Institute on Aging

Table of Contents
Introduction 3
Differences between mild forgetfulness
and more serious memory problems 5
What is mild forgetfulness? 5
What can I do about mild forgetfulness? 5
Ways to help your memory 6
What is a serious memory problem? 7
What can I do about serious memory problems? 7
Serious memory problems—
causes and treatments 9
Medical conditions 9
Emotional problems 11
Mild cognitive impairment 13
Alzheimer’s disease 15
Vascular dementia 17
Help for serious memory problems 18
What can I do if I’m worried about my memory? 18
What can family members do to help? 19
Clinical trials and studies 20
What you need to know 21
Where can I get more information? 22
Words to know 24

3
Introduction
We’ve all forgotten a name, where we
put our keys, or if we locked the front
door. It’s normal to forget things once in
a while. However, forgetting how to make
change, use the telephone, or find your
way home may be signs of a more serious
memory problem.
This booklet will help you
learn about:
* the difference between mild forgetfulness and
more serious memory problems
* causes of memory problems and how they can
be treated
* how to cope with serious memory problems
Tips about using the booklet
Use the Table of Contents to help you find things quickly.
Also, we put some medical terms in bold, such as brain scan.
You can find how to say these words and what they mean in
the “Words to know” section on page 24.
4
Mary’s story
Mary couldn’t find her car keys. She looked on the
hook just inside the front door. They weren’t there.
She searched in her purse. No luck. Finally, she found
them on her desk. Yesterday, she forgot her neighbor’s
name. Her memory was playing tricks on her. She was
starting to worry about it.
She decided to see her doctor. After a complete check-up,
her doctor said that Mary was fine. Her forgetfulness was
just a normal part of getting older. The doctor suggested
that Mary take a class, play cards with friends, or help out
at the local school to help her memory.
5
Differences between
mild forgetfulness and
more serious memory problems
What is mild forgetfulness?
It is true that some of us get more forgetful as we age. It may
take longer to learn new things, remember certain words,
or find our glasses. These changes are often signs of mild
forgetfulness, not serious memory problems.
See your doctor if you’re worried about your forgetfulness.
Tell him or her about your concerns. Be sure to make a
follow-up appointment to check your memory in the next
6 months to a year. If you think you might forget, ask a family
member, friend, or the doctor’s office to remind you.
What can I do about mild forgetfulness?
You can do many things to help your memory. Look at the list
on page 6 for some helpful ideas.
6
Here are some ways to help
your memory:
Learn a new skill.
Volunteer in your community, at a school, or at your place
of worship.
Spend time with friends and family.
Use memory tools such as big calendars, to-do lists, and
notes to yourself.
Put your wallet or purse, keys, and glasses in the same
place each day.
Get lots of rest.
Exercise and eat well.
Don’t drink a lot of alcohol.
Get help if you feel depressed for weeks at a time.
Spending time with friends and family may help your memory.
7
What is a serious memory problem?
Serious memory problems make it hard to do everyday
things. For example, you may find it hard to drive, shop, or
even talk with a friend. Signs of serious memory problems
may include:
* asking the same questions over and over again
* getting lost in places you know well
* not being able to follow directions
* becoming more confused about time, people, and places
* not taking care of yourself—eating poorly, not bathing,
or being unsafe
What can I do about
serious memory problems?
See your doctor if you are having any of the problems listed
above. It’s important to find out what might be causing a
serious memory problem. Once you know the cause, you
can get the right treatment.
Talk with your doctor if you think you have a serious memory problem.
8
Al’s story
Al didn’t know what was happening. He was having a hard
time remembering things. He wasn’t eating or sleeping
well and didn’t want to see friends. He was confused
and irritable.
His wife was worried. She took him to the doctor.
It turned out that Al was having a bad reaction to one of
his medicines. Once his doctor changed the medicine,
Al felt more like himself. 
9
Serious memory problems—
causes and treatments
Many things can cause serious memory problems, such as blood
clots, depression, and Alzheimer’s disease. Read below to learn
more about causes and treatments of serious memory problems.
Medical conditions
Certain medical conditions can cause serious memory
problems. These problems should go away once you get
treatment. Some medical conditions that may cause
memory problems are:
* bad reaction to certain medicines
* depression
* not eating enough healthy foods, or too few vitamins
and minerals in your body
* drinking too much alcohol
* blood clots or tumors in the brain
* head injury, such as a concussion from a fall or accident
* thyroid, kidney, or liver problems
Treatment for medical conditions
These medical conditions are serious. See your doctor
for treatment. 
10
Gloria’s story
Gloria was feeling sad all the time. She just wanted
to sleep all day and night. She was becoming really
forgetful, too. Gloria’s nephew Bob was afraid something
was very wrong. He took her to see a doctor. The doctor
said she had depression and needed to take medicine and
see a counselor.
After 3 months, Bob could see the change in his aunt. She
was eating and sleeping better. Gloria also was spending
more time with friends and doing volunteer work. 
11
Emotional problems
Some emotional problems in older people can cause serious
memory problems. Feeling sad, lonely, worried, or bored can
cause you to be confused or forgetful.
Treatment for emotional problems
* You may need to see a doctor or counselor for treatment
if these feelings last for more than 2 weeks. Once you get
help, your memory problems should get better.
* Being active, spending more time with family and friends,
and learning new skills also can help you feel better and
improve your memory.
Being active can help you feel better.
12
Joe’s story
Joe was almost 74. He was still working part-time.
He noticed that he was becoming more forgetful at work.
He felt frustrated that it was so hard to find the right
words to describe something. His boss told him that he
missed a couple of meetings. He started to wonder if he
had a serious problem.
Joe’s wife took him to get a complete health check-up.
His doctor told Joe that he had mild cognitive impairment,
also called MCI. The doctor said there was no treatment
for MCI, but that he would keep a close watch on Joe’s
memory and thinking skills. Joe felt better knowing there
was a reason for his memory problems.
13
Mild cognitive impairment
(pronounced mild kog-ni-tiv im-pair-ment)
As some people grow older, they have more memory
problems than other people their age. This condition is
called mild cognitive impairment, or MCI. People with MCI
can take care of themselves and do their normal activities.
MCI memory problems may include:
* losing things often
* forgetting to go to events or appointments
* having more trouble coming up with words than other
people of the same age
Your doctor can do thinking, memory, and language tests to
see if you have MCI. He or she also may suggest that you see
a specialist for more tests. Because MCI may be an early sign
of Alzheimer’s disease, it’s important to see your doctor or
specialist every 6 to 12 months. See page 15 for more about
Alzheimer’s disease.
Treatment for MCI
* At this time, there is no proven treatment for MCI. Your
doctor can check to see if you have any changes in your
memory or thinking skills over time.
* There are things you can do that may help you stay
healthy and deal with changes in your thinking. The list
on page 6 suggests some ways to help your memory.
14
Anna’s story
Anna’s mother was still going strong at 85. She kept
busy with friends and church activities. But lately, Anna
had noticed changes. Her mother was becoming more
forgetful and confused. Also, she was spending a lot
of time alone in her house. One day, her mom got lost
on her way home from shopping.
Anna knew it was time to get help. She took her mom to
the doctor. Anna was really upset to learn that her mom
had early-stage Alzheimer’s disease. It’s been tough, but
learning about treatment choices, what to expect in the
future, and how to live with the disease has helped the
whole family. They’re taking one day at a time. 
15
Alzheimer’s disease
(pronounced Allz-high-merz duh-zeez)
Alzheimer’s disease causes serious memory problems.
The signs of Alzheimer’s disease begin slowly and get worse
over time. This is because changes in the brain cause large
numbers of brain cells to die.
It may look like simple forgetfulness at first, but over time,
people with Alzheimer’s disease have trouble thinking
clearly. They find it hard to do everyday things like shopping,
driving, and cooking. As the illness gets worse, people with
Alzheimer’s disease may need someone to take care of all
their needs at home or in a nursing home. These needs may
include feeding, bathing, and dressing.
Treatment for Alzheimer’s disease
* Taking certain medicines can help slow down some
symptoms, such as memory loss, for a time. The medicines
can have side effects and may not work for everyone. Talk
with your doctor about side effects or other concerns you
may have.
* Other medicines can help if you are worried, depressed,
or having problems sleeping.
See page 22 to learn where families can go for help
and information. 
16
Sam’s story
Sam was an active 70-year-old who felt healthy. He
couldn’t believe it when, all of a sudden, he couldn’t
remember what somebody told him 5 minutes ago.
He went for a check-up and had some tests, including a
brain scan. After reviewing the test results, the doctor told
him that his forgetfulness was caused by small strokes.
These strokes had damaged some of his brain cells.
She said his problem was called vascular dementia.
The doctor told Sam that she couldn’t cure his memory
problems. But, she could give him medicine to control his
high blood pressure. This medicine also would lower his
chances of having more strokes.
17
Vascular dementia
(pronounced vas-kue-ler duh-men-shuh)
Many people have never heard of vascular dementia. Like
Alzheimer’s disease, it is a medical condition that causes
serious memory problems. Unlike Alzheimer’s disease, signs
of vascular dementia may appear suddenly. This is because
the memory loss and confusion are caused by changes in the
blood supply to the brain, often after a stroke. If the strokes
stop, you may get better or stay the same for a long time. If
you have more strokes, you may get worse.
Treatment for vascular dementia
You can take steps to lower your chances of having more
strokes. These steps include:
* Control your high blood pressure.
* Treat your high cholesterol.
* Take care of your diabetes.
* Stop smoking.
Get your blood pressure checked each time you see the doctor.
18
Help for serious
memory problems
What can I do if I’m worried about
my memory?
See your doctor. If your doctor thinks your memory
problems are serious, you may need to have a complete
health check-up. The doctor will review your medicines and
may test your blood and urine. You also may need to take
tests that check your memory, problem solving, counting,
and language skills.
In addition, the doctor may suggest a brain scan. Pictures
from the scan can show normal and problem areas in the
brain. Once the doctor finds out what is causing your
memory problems, ask about the best treatment for you.
Doctors can do brain scans to check for some causes of
memory problems.
19
What can family members do to help?
If your family member or friend has a serious memory
problem, you can help the person live as normal a life as
possible. You can help the person stay active, go places,
and keep up everyday routines. You can remind the person
of the time of day, where he or she lives, and what is
happening at home and in the world. You also can help
the person remember to take medicine or visit the doctor.
Some families use the following things to help with
memory problems:
big calendars to highlight important dates and events
lists of the plans for each day
notes about safety in the home
written directions for using common household items
(most people with Alzheimer’s disease can still read)
Family members and friends can help people with serious memory
problems live as normal a life as possible.
20
Clinical trials and studies
People with Alzheimer’s disease, MCI, or a family history of
Alzheimer’s may be able to take part in clinical trials, a type
of research study. Healthy people with no memory problems
and no family history of Alzheimer’s also may be able to take
part in clinical trials.
Joining a clinical trial or other research study is a way to
help fight Alzheimer’s disease. To find out more about
clinical trials:
* Call the Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education
and Referral (ADEAR) Center at 1-800-438-4380.
It’s a free call.
* Visit the ADEAR Center website at
www.nia.nih.gov/alzheimers/clinical-trials.
* Check out www.ClinicalTrials.gov.
* See “NIH Clinical Research Trials and You” at
www.nih.gov/health/clinicaltrials.
21
What you need to know
There are differences between normal forgetfulness and
more serious memory problems.
It’s important to understand the causes of
memory problems and how they can be treated.
You can get help for mild and serious memory problems.
See your doctor if you are worried about your memory.
It’s important to find out what is causing your
memory problems.
It’s important to find out what is causing your memory problems.
22
Where can I get
more information?
Contact the following organizations to learn more about
memory loss. They can give you information about support
groups and services, and publications on brain health, and
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias. They can also
give you information about research centers and clinical
trials and studies.
Alzheimer’s and related Dementias
Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center
1-800-438-4380
adear@nia.nih.gov
www.alzheimers.gov
The Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education and
Referral (ADEAR) Center offers information on diagnosis,
treatment, patient care, caregiver needs, long-term care, and
research related to Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias.
Staff can refer you to local and national resources. The Center
is a service of the National Institute on Aging, part of the
Federal Government’s National Institutes of Health. 
23
Alzheimer’s Association
1-800-272-3900 (toll-free)
1-866-403-3073 (TTY/toll-free)
info@alz.org
www.alz.org
The Alzheimer’s Association is a nonprofit organization
offering information and support services to people with
Alzheimer’s disease and their caregivers and families. The
Alzheimer’s Association also sponsors research. Call or visit
their website to find out where to get help in your area.
Alzheimer’s Foundation of America
1-866-232-8484 (toll-free)
info@alzfdn.org
www.alzfdn.org
This foundation serves people with dementia and their
caregivers and families. Services include a toll-free
hotline, publications, and online resources.
Eldercare Locator
1-800-677-1116 (toll-free)
www.eldercare.gov
Families often need information about community
resources, such as home care, adult day care, and nursing
homes. Contact the Eldercare Locator to find these
resources in your area. The Eldercare Locator is a service
of the Administration on Aging. It is funded by the
Federal Government. 
24
Words to know
Alzheimer’s disease
(pronounced Allz-high-merz duh-zeez)
A disease that causes large numbers of nerve cells in the brain
to die. These changes make it hard for a person to remember
things, have clear thinking, and make good judgments.
The symptoms begin slowly and get worse over time.
Brain scan
A type of test that shows pictures of normal and problem
areas in the brain.
Mild cognitive impairment
(pronounced mild kog-ni-tiv im-pair-ment)
Also called MCI. It is a medical condition that causes people
to have more memory problems than other people their age.
The signs of MCI are not as severe as those of Alzheimer’s
disease. They include losing things often, forgetting to go to
events and appointments, and having more trouble coming
up with the right words than other people the same age.
Vascular dementia
(pronounced vas-kue-ler duh-men-shuh)
A medical condition caused by changes in the blood supply
to the brain, often after a stroke. Signs can appear suddenly.
These signs include changes in memory, language, thinking
skills, and mood.
For copies of this booklet, contact:
Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education
and Referral Center
1-800-438-4380 (toll-free)
adear@nia.nih.gov
www.alzheimers.gov
NIH Publication No. 18-AG-5442
January 2018