Understanding
Alzheimer’s Disease
What you need to know
From the National Institute on Aging 
For copies of this booklet, contact:
Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education
and Referral Center



Table of Contents
Introduction 1
What is Alzheimer’s disease? 3
What are the signs of Alzheimer’s disease? 4
When should you see your doctor? 7
What are other causes of memory problems? 9
Are there treatments for Alzheimer’s disease? 11
What about research on Alzheimer’s disease? 13
Is there help for caregivers? 15
Summary—What you need to know 16
Where can you get more information? 17
Words to know 19 
Many older adults and their families are faced with Alzheimer’s disease.
It’s important to know the signs of the disease and where to get help. 






Introduction
Many older people forget someone’s name or misplace things
from time to time. This kind of forgetfulness is normal. But,
forgetting how to get home, getting confused in places a person
knows well, or asking questions over and over can be signs of
a more serious problem. The person may have Alzheimer’s
disease (pronounced Allz-high-merz duh-zeez). It is a disease
of the brain that begins slowly and gets worse over time.
This booklet will help you learn
about Alzheimer’s disease:
* what it is.
* signs of the disease.
* when it is important to see your doctor.
* treatment.
* research studies.
* how to get help caring for a person with Alzheimer’s
Tips about using this booklet.
Use the Table of Contents to help you find things quickly.
Also, we put some medical terms in bold, such as Alzheimer’s
disease. You can find how to say these words and what they
mean in the “Words to know” section on page 19.
1
Helen’s story.
I have Alzheimer’s disease. It took me a long time before I
could even say the words. When the doctor first told me,
I felt like my life was over. For a while, I was depressed.
My doctor told me about medicine I could take. She said it
would slow down my memory loss for a while. I know it’s
not a cure. Still, it feels good to do something.
My family has been wonderful. They’re helping me plan
for the care I’ll need. I have decided to take each day as it
comes. I want to live my life as fully as I can.
2

What is Alzheimer’s disease?
Alzheimer’s disease is an illness of the brain. It causes large
numbers of nerve cells in the brain to die. This affects a
person’s ability to remember things, think clearly, and use
good judgment.
Doctors don’t know what causes the disease. They do know
that most of the time it begins after age 60.
What happens when a person has
Alzheimer’s disease?
Alzheimer’s disease often starts slowly. In fact, some people
don’t know they have it. They blame their forgetfulness on
old age. However, over time, their memory problems get
more serious.
People with Alzheimer’s disease have trouble doing everyday
things like driving a car, cooking a meal, or paying bills. They
may get lost easily and find even simple things confusing.
Some people become worried, angry, or violent.
As the illness gets worse, most people with Alzheimer’s disease
need someone to take care of all their needs, including feeding
and bathing. Some people with Alzheimer’s live at home with
a caregiver. Other people with the disease live in assisted living
or a nursing home.
3









What are the signs of Alzheimer’s disease?
It’s important to know the signs of Alzheimer’s disease. If
you know the signs, you can get help right away. Some signs
of the disease are listed here:
Early signs
* finding it hard to remember things.
* asking the same questions over and over.
* having trouble paying bills or solving simple math problems.
* getting lost.
* losing things or putting them in odd places
Later signs.
* forgetting how to brush your teeth or comb your hair.
* being confused about time, people, and places.
* forgetting the names of common things such as a desk,
house, or apple.
* wandering away from home.



Mild cognitive impairment
Some older people have a condition called mild cognitive
impairment, or MCI. It can be an early sign of Alzheimer’s.
But, not everyone with MCI will develop Alzheimer’s disease.
People with MCI can still take care of themselves and do their
normal activities. MCI memory problems may include:
* losing things often
* forgetting to go to events or appointments
* having more trouble coming up with words than other
people of the same age
If you have MCI, it’s important to see your doctor or
specialist every 6 to 12 months. Ask him or her to check for
changes in your memory and thinking.
Differences between Alzheimer’s disease and
normal aging
Use the chart below to help you understand the differences
between Alzheimer’s disease and the normal signs of aging.
Alzheimer’s disease Normal aging
Making poor judgments and
decisions a lot of the time
Making a bad decision
once in a while
Problems taking care of monthly bills Missing a monthly payment
Losing track of the date
or time of year
Forgetting which day it is and
remembering it later
Trouble having a conversation Sometimes forgetting which
word to use
Misplacing things often and being
unable to find them
Losing things from time to time
5
Rita’s story
A few months ago, my mother started having trouble
remembering things. Sometimes, she couldn’t find the
right words. Then, she got lost on her way home from
the store. I knew something was wrong. I talked with my
mom, and we decided to see her doctor.
The doctor asked about the changes we had seen and did
a medical exam. He also changed one of Mom’s medicines
to see if that would make a difference. And, he suggested
that she see a specialist who could test her memory and
thinking skills. He said it was good that she came in now
instead of waiting so we could start figuring out what the
problem might be.
6







When should you see
your doctor?
If you or someone in your family thinks your forgetfulness
is getting in the way of your normal routine, it’s time to see
your doctor. Seeing the doctor when you first start having
memory problems can help you find out what’s causing
your forgetfulness. If you have Alzheimer’s, finding the
disease early gives you and your family more time to plan for
your treatment and care.
Your doctor or a specialist may do the following things to
find out if you have Alzheimer’s disease:
* give you a medical check-up
* ask questions about your family’s health
* ask how well you can do everyday things like driving,
shopping for food, and paying bills
* talk with someone in your family about your memory
problems
* test your memory, problem-solving, counting, and
language skills
* check your blood and urine, and do other medical tests
* do brain scans that show pictures of your brain
7
Linda’s story
My neighbor Rose was always very active. She liked
gardening and helping out at the local grade school. She
and her husband Bob enjoyed dancing and spending time
with their grandkids. After Bob passed away 2 years ago,
something changed. Rose began spending a lot of time
alone at home. She seemed more and more confused.
I was worried that Rose had Alzheimer’s disease and
convinced her to see a doctor. It turns out that she doesn’t
have Alzheimer’s. Depression and not eating well were
causing her problems. After seeing a counselor, taking
medicine, and eating better, she seems less confused and
more like herself.
8








What are other causes of
memory problems?
Some medical conditions cause confusion and forgetfulness.
The signs may look like Alzheimer’s disease, but they are
caused by other problems. Here are medical conditions that
can cause serious memory problems:
* bad reaction to certain medicines
* emotional problems such as depression
* not eating enough healthy foods
* too few vitamins and minerals in your body
* drinking too much alcohol
* blood clots or tumors in the brain
* head injury, such as a concussion from a fall or accident
* kidney, liver, or thyroid problems
These medical conditions are serious and need to be treated.
Once you get treatment, your confusion and forgetfulness
should go away.
9
Rick’s story
My wife Jenny was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease a
few years ago. She’s been taking medicine for her memory
problems. It’s helped some, but now she seems to be
getting worse.
We talked with the doctor. He’s going to change her
medicine and see if that helps. We both know there is no
cure, but we do want more time together.
10
Are there treatments for
Alzheimer’s disease?
There are medicines that can treat the symptoms of
Alzheimer’s disease. But, there is no cure. Most of these
medicines work best for people in the early or middle stages
of the disease. For example, they can keep your memory loss
from getting worse for a time. Other medicines may help if
you have trouble sleeping, or are worried and depressed. All
these medicines may have side effects and may not work
for everyone.
Some medicines can help treat the symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease.
11
Ed’s story
My nephew told me about an Alzheimer’s disease study at
a nearby research center. I don’t have memory problems
now, but the disease runs in my family, so I worry about
it. I called to find out about the study. The nurse asked me
some questions about myself and my family health history
to see if I could join. Later, my wife and I set up a time to go
to the research center.
Taking part in the study has been interesting. Research
like this could help find new treatments or even someday
prevent Alzheimer’s. Being part of a study is important to
help my family and others in the future.
12



What about research on
Alzheimer’s disease?
Researchers are doing studies with people who have different
kinds of memory problems to find new and better ways to
treat the disease. They also are looking at how to prevent
Alzheimer’s, slow the disease, and reduce its symptoms.
People with Alzheimer’s disease, MCI, or a family history of
Alzheimer’s may be able to take part in clinical trials, a type
of research study. Healthy people with no memory problems
and no family history of Alzheimer’s also may be able to take
part in clinical trials.
Joining a clinical trial or other research study is a way to help
fight Alzheimer’s disease.
To find out more about clinical trials
and studies:
* Call the Alzheimer’s and related Dementias Education
and Referral (ADEAR) Center at 1-800-438-4380.
It’s a free call.
* Visit the ADEAR Center website at
www.nia.nih.gov/health/clinical-trials.
* See “NIH Clinical Research Trials and You” at
www.nih.gov/health-information/
nih-clinical-research-trials-you.
13
John’s story
My neighbor’s mom has Alzheimer’s disease. I never
thought it would happen to someone in my family. I was
upset and worried when I found out my father had the
disease. I had so many questions. What is Alzheimer’s
disease? Can it be treated? How is the disease going to
affect my father? Will I be able to care for him? Where can
I go for help? In time, I found information on the Internet
and by calling Alzheimer’s groups.
14




Is there help for caregivers?
Yes, there is help for caregivers. You don’t have to do
everything yourself. See the list below for ways to get help.
* Find a support group.
* Use adult day care services.
* Get help from a local home health care agency.
* Contact local and national groups for information about
Alzheimer’s disease.
Be sure to check out pages 17 and 18 for groups and services
that can help you.
Coping as a caregiver
If you are caring for someone with Alzheimer’s disease, you
may have many different feelings. Sometimes, taking care of
the person with Alzheimer’s makes you feel good because
you are providing love and comfort. At other times, it can be
overwhelming. You may see changes in the person that are
hard to understand and cope with.
Each day brings new challenges. You may find yourself
dealing with problem behaviors or just trying to get through
the day. You may not even realize how much you have taken
on because the changes can happen slowly over time.
15










Take care of yourself
Taking care of yourself is one of the most important things
you can do as a caregiver. You could:
* ask friends and family to help out
* do things you enjoy and spend time with friends
* take short breaks
* eat healthy foods and get exercise
Taking these actions can bring you some relief. It also may
help keep you from getting ill or depressed.
Summary—What you need to know
* Know the signs of Alzheimer’s disease.
* See a doctor right away if you are worried about your
memory problems.
* Take medicines to help treat the symptoms of
Alzheimer’s disease. Right now, there is no cure.
* Think about joining a clinical trial if you are healthy
or if you have Alzheimer’s disease.
* Get help if you are caring for someone with
Alzheimer’s.
See your doctor if you are worried about your thinking
or think you might have Alzheimer’s disease. It’s
important to find out what is causing your memory
problems.
16




Where can you get
more information?
Contact the following groups to learn more about Alzheimer’s
disease. They can help you find information, support groups,
and services. They also can give you information about clinical
trials and other research studies.
Alzheimer’s and related Dementias
Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center
1-800-438-4380
adear@nia.nih.gov
www.alzheimers.gov
This Center provides information on:
* diagnosing Alzheimer’s disease
* treating Alzheimer’s symptoms
* caring for the person with the disease
* meeting the needs of caregivers
* finding long-term care for the person with Alzheimer’s
* taking part in Alzheimer’s disease research
ADEAR Center staff can refer you to local and national
resources. The Center is a service of the National Institute on
Aging, part of the Federal Government’s National Institutes
of Health.
17
Alzheimer’s Association
1-800-272-3900
info@alz.org
www.alz.org
The Alzheimer’s Association is a nonprofit group offering
information and support services to people with Alzheimer’s
disease and their caregivers and families. The Alzheimer’s
Association also sponsors research. Call or visit their website
to find out where to get help in your area.
Alzheimer’s Foundation of America
1-866-232-8484
info@alzfdn.org
www.alzfdn.org
This foundation serves people with Alzheimer’s disease
and their caregivers and families. Services include a toll-free
helpline, caregiver support groups, and online resources.
Eldercare Locator
1-800-677-1116
www.eldercare.gov
The Eldercare Locator helps families find resources in their
community, such as home care, adult day care, and nursing
homes. Contact them to learn about services in your area.
The Eldercare Locator is a service of the Administration on
Aging. It is funded by the Federal Government.
18


Words to know
Alzheimer’s disease
(pronounced Allz-high-merz duh-zeez)
A disease that causes large numbers of nerve cells in the brain
to die. These changes make it hard for a person to remember
things, think clearly, and use good judgment. The symptoms
begin slowly and get worse over time.
Clinical trial
(pronounced klin-uh-kuhl try-uhl)
A research study to find out if new treatments are safe and
effective. Healthy people and people with Alzheimer’s
disease can choose to take part in a clinical trial.
Depression
(pronounced dee-presh-uhn)
A serious medical illness that can be treated. Some signs of
depression are:
* feeling sad for more than a few weeks at a time
* having trouble sleeping
* losing interest in things you like to do
Depression can cause people to be confused and forgetful.
Mild cognitive impairment
(pronounced mild kog-ni-tiv im-pair-ment)
Also called MCI. It is a medical condition that causes people to
have more memory problems than other people their age. The
signs of MCI are not as severe as those of Alzheimer’s disease.
19
NIH Publication No. 18-AG-5441
September 2018 